CLIMATE CHANGE



*.s















•£





world Meteorological organization united nations environment programme

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

This is the final Report of Working Group 1 of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which is sponsored jointly by the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme. The report considers the scientific assessment of climate change. Several hundred working scientists from 25 countries have participated in the preparation and review of the scientific data. The result is the most authoritative and strongly supported statement on climate change that has ever been made by the international scientific community. The issues confronted with full rigour include: global warming, greenhouse gases, the greenhouse effect, sea level changes, forcing of climate, and the history of Earth’s changing climate. The information presented here is of the highest quality. It will inform the necessary scientific, political and economic debates and negotiations that can be expected in the immediate future. Appropriate strategies in response to the issue of climate change can now be firmly based on the scientific foundation that the Report provides. The Report is, therefore, an essential reference for all who are concerned with climate change and its consequences.

Climate Change

THE IPCC SCIENTIFIC ASSESSMENT

Climate Change

The IPCC Scientific Assessment

Edited by

J. T. HOUGHTON, G. J. JENKINS and J. J. EPHRAUMS

The right of the University of Cambridge Io prim and sett ail manner of bookj *0$ granted by Henry VIII in 1S34. Tht University has printed and pubfalted canfimrousty rirtcf m

Published for the

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Cambridge

New York Port Chester - Melbourne Sydney

Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1RP 40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011, USA

10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia

© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1990

First published 1990

Reprinted 1991

Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge

British Library cataloguing in publication data

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Climate Change.

1. Climate Changes

I. Title II. Houghton, John T. (John Theodore) 1931-III. Jenkins, G. J. IV. Ephraums, J. J.

551.6

Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data available

ISBN 0 521 40360 X hardback

ISBN 0 521 40720 6 paperback

INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

CLIMATE CHANGE

The IPCC Scientific Assessment

Report Prepared for IPCC by Working Group 1

Edited by J.T.Houghton, GJJenkins and J.J.Ephraums

(Meteorological Office, Bracknell, United Kingdom)

WMO

UNEP

Contents

Preface  Foreword	iii  V
Policymakers Summary	vii
Introduction	XXXV
1 Greenhouse Gases and Aerosols  R.T. WATSON, H. RODHE, H. OESCHGER AND U. SIEGENTHALER	1
2 Radiative Forcing of Climate  K.P. SHINE, R.G. DERWENT, D.J. WUEBBLES AND J-J. MORCRETTE	41
3 Processes and Modelling  U. CUBASCH AND R.D. CESS	69
4 Validation of Climate Models  W.L. GATES, P.R. ROWNTREE AND Q-C. ZENG	93
5 Equilibrium Climate Change  J.F.B. MITCHELL, S. MANABE, T. TOKIOKA AND V. MELESHKO	131
6 Time-Dependent Greenhouse-Gas-Induced Climate Change  F.P. BRETHERTON, K. BRYAN AND J.D. WOODS	173
7 Observed Climate Variations and Change  C.K. FOLLAND, T. KARL AND K.YA. VINNIKOV	195

8	Detection of the Greenhouse Effect in the Observations T.M.L. WIGLEY AND T.P. BARNETT

Il

Contents

9	Sea Level Rise	257

R.	A. WARRICK AND H. OERLEMANS

10	Effects on Ecosystems	283

J.M. MELILLO, T.V. CALLAGHAN, F.I. WOODWARD, E. SALATI AND

S.	K. SINHA

11	Narrowing the Uncertainties	311

G. McBEAN AND J. MCCARTHY

Annex	329

Appendix 1 Emission Scenarios	341

Appendix 2 Organisation ofIPCC and WGI	343

Appendix 3 Contributors to the WGI Report	345

Appendix 4 Reviewers of the WGI Report	353

Appendix 5 Acronyms - Institutions	359

Appendix 6 Acronyms - Programmes and Miscellaneous	361

Appendix 7 Units	363

Appendix 8 Chemical Symbols	365

Preface

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was jointly established by our two organisations in 1988. Under the chairmanship of Professor Bert Bolin, the Panel was charged with:

(i) assessing the scientific information that is related to the various components of the climate change issue, such as emissions of major greenhouse gases and modification of the Earth's radiation balance resulting therefrom, and that needed to enable the environmental and socio-economic consequences of climate change to be evaluated.

(ii) formulating realistic response strategies for the management of the climate change issue.

The Panel began its task by establishing Working Groups I, II and III respectively to:

(a)	assess available scientific information on climate change.

(b)	assess environmental and socio-economic impacts of climate change.

(c)	formulate response strategies.

It also established a Special Committee on the Participation of Developing Countries to promote, as quickly as possible, the full participation of developing countries in its activities.

This volume is based upon the findings of Working Group I, and should be read in conjunction with the rest of the IPCC first assessment report; the latter consists of the reports and policymakers summaries of the 3 Working Groups and the Special Committee, and the IPCC overview and conclusions.

The Chairman of Working Group I, Dr John Houghton, and his Secretariat, have succeeded beyond measure in mobilizing the co-operation and enthusiasm of hundreds of scientists from all over the world. They have produced a volume of remarkable depth and breadth, and a Policymakers Summary which translates these complex scientific issues into language which is understandable to the non-specialist.

We take this opportunity to congratulate and thank the Chairman for a job well done.

G.O.P. Obasi

Secretary-General

World Meteorological Organization

M.K. Tolba

Executive Director

United Nations Environment Programme

Foreword

Many previous reports have addressed the question of climate change which might arise as a result of man's activities. In preparing this Scientific Assessment, Working Group I 1 has built on these, in particular the SCOPE 29 report of 1986 1 2, taking into account significant work undertaken and published since then Particular attention is paid to what is known regarding the detail of climate change on a regional level

In the preparation of the main Assessment most of the active scientists working in the field have been involved One hundred and seventy scientists from 25 countries have contributed to it, either through participation in the twelve international workshops organised specially for the purpose or through written contributions A further 200 scientists have been involved in the peer review of the draft report Although, as in any developing scientific topic, there is a minority of opinions which we have not been able to accommodate, the peer review has helped to ensure a high degree of consensus amongst authors and reviewers regarding the results presented Thus the Assessment is an authoritative statement of the views of the international scientific community at this time

The accompanying Policymakers' Summary, based closely on the conclusions of the Assessment, has been prepared particularly to meet the needs of those without a strong background in science who need a clear statement of the present status of scientific knowledge and the associated uncertainties

The First Draft of the Policymakers Summary was presented to the meeting of the Lead Authors of the Assessment (Edinburgh, February 1990), and the Second Draft which emanated from that meeting was sent for the same wide peer review as the main report, including nationally designated experts and the committees of relevant international scientific programmes A Third Draft incorporating a large number of changes suggested by peerreviewers was tabled at the final plenary meeting of Working Group I (Windsor, May 1990) at which the Lead Authors of the main report were present, and the final version was agreed at that meeting

It gives me pleasure to acknowledge the contributions of so many, in particular the Lead Authors, who have given freely of their expertise and time to the preparation of this report All the modelling centres must be thanked for providing data so readily for the model intercomparison I also acknowledge the contribution of the core team at the Meteorological Office in Bracknell who were responsible for organising most of the workshops and preparing the report Members of the team were Professor Cac Hong Xing from China, Dr Reindert Haarsma from The Netherlands, Dr Robert Watson from the USA, and Dr John Mitchell, Dr Peter Rowntree, Dr Terry Callaghan, Chris Folland, Jim Ephraums, Shelagh Varney, Andrew Gilchrtsl and Aileen Foreman from the UK Particular acknowledgment is due to Dr Geoff Jenkins, the Coordinator of Working Group I who led the team Thanks

1	Organisational details of IPCC and Working Group I are shown

in Appendix 2

2	The Greenhouse Effect, Climate Change and Ecosystems,

SCOPE 29, Bolin, B , B Doos, J Jager and R A Warrick (Fds ), John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1986

are also due to Dr Sundararaman and the IPCC Secretariat in Geneva. Financial support for the Bracknell core team was provided by the Departments of the Environment and Energy in the UK.

I am confident that the Assessment and its Summary will provide the necessary firm scientific foundation for the

forthcoming discussions and negotiations on the appropriate strategy for response and action regarding the issue of climate change. It is thus, I believe, a significant step forward in meeting what is potentially the greatest global environmental challenge facing mankind.



Dr John Houghton

Chairman, IPCC Working Group I

Meteorological Office Bracknell

July 1990

Policymakers Summary

Prepared by IPCC Working Group I

CONTENTS

Executive Summary	xi

Introduction: what is the issue?	xin

What factors determine global climate?	xm

What natural factors are important'’	xm

How do we know that the natural greenhouse effect is real9	xiv

How might human	activities change	global	climate9	xiv

What are the greenhouse gases and why are they increasing?	xv

Concentrations, lifetimes	and stabilisation of the gases	xvn

How will greenhouse gas abundances change in the future9	xvn

Greenhouse gas feedbacks	xvin

Which gases are the most important?	xvm

How can we evaluate the effect of different greenhouse

gases9	xix

How much do we expect climate to change?	xx

How quickly will global climate change9	xxn

a If emissions follow a Business-as-Usual pattern xxn b If emissions ai e subject to controls	xxn

What will be the patterns of climate change by 20309 xxm

How will climate extremes and extreme events

change9	xxm

Will storms increase in a warmer world9	xxv

Climate change in the longer term	xxvi

Other factors which could influence future climate xxvn

How much confidence do we have in our predictions? xxvn Will the climate of the future be very different?	xxvn

Has man already begun to change the global climate? xxvm How much will sea level rise?	xxix

What will be the effect of climate change on ecosystems? xxx What should be done to reduce uncertainties, and how long will this take?	xxxi

Annex	xxxiv

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

We are certain of the following:

•	there is a natural greenhouse effect which already keeps the Earth warmer than it would otherwise be

•	emissions resulting from human activities are substantially increasing the atmospheric concen trations of the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide, methane, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and nitrous oxide These increases will enhance the greenhouse effect, resulting on average in an additional warming of the Earth's surface The mam greenhouse gas, water vapour, will increase in response to global warming and further enhance it

We calculate with confidence that:

•	some gases are potentially more effective than others at changing climate, and their relative effectiveness can be estimated Carbon dioxide has been responsible for over half the enhanced greenhouse effect in the past, and is likely to remain so in the future

•	atmospheric concentrations of the long-lived gases (carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and the CFCs) adjust only slowly to changes in emissions Continued emissions of these gases at present rates would commit us to increased concentrations lor centuries ahead The longer emissions continue to increase at present day rates, the greater reductions would have to be for concentrations to stabilise at a given level

•	the long-lived gases would require immediate reductions in emissions from human activities of over 60% to stabilise their concentrations at today's levels, methane would require a 15-20% reduction

Based on current model results, we predict:

•	under the IPCC Business-as-Usual (Scenario A) emissions of greenhouse gases, a rate of increase of

global mean temperature during the next century of about 0 3°C per decade (with an uncertainty range of 0 2°C to 0 5°C per decade), this is greater than that seen over the past 10,000 years This will result in a likely increase in global mean temperature of about 1°C above the present value by 2025 and VC before the end of the next century The rise will not be steady because of the influence of other factors

•	under the other IPCC emission scenarios which assume progressively increasing levels of controls rates of increase in global mean temperature of about 0 2°C per decade (Scenario B), just above 0 1°C per decade (Scenario C) and about 0 1 °C per decade (Scenario D)

•	that land surfaces warm more rapidly than the ocean and high northern latitudes warm more than the global mean in winter

•	regional climate changes different from the global mean, although our confidence in the prediction of the detail of regional changes is low For example, temperature increases in Southern Europe and central North America are predicted to be higher than the global mean accompanied on average by reduced summer precipitation and soil moistuic There are less consistent predictions lor the tropics and the Southern Hemisphere

•	under the IPCC Business as Usual emissions scenario, an average rate of global mean sea level rise of about 6cm per decade over the next century (with an uncertainty range of 3 - 10cm per decade) mainly due to thermal expansion ol the oceans and the melting of some land ice The predicted rise is about 20cm in global mean sea level by 2030, and 65cm by the end of the next century There will be significant regional variations

There are many uncertainties in our predictions particularly with regard to the timing, magnitude and regional patterns of climate change, due to our incomplete understanding of:

•	sources and sinks of greenhouse gases, which affect predictions of future concentrations

•	clouds, which strongly influence the magnitude of climate change

•	oceans, which influence the timing and patterns of climate change

•	polar ice sheets which affect predictions of sea level rise

These processes are already partially understood, and we are confident that the uncertainties can be reduced by further research However, the complexity of the system means that we cannot rule out surprises

Our judgement is that:

•	Global - mean surface air temperature has increased by 0 3°C to 0 6°C over the last 100 years, with the five global-average warmest years being in the 1980s Over the same period global sea level has increased by 10-20cm These increases have not been smooth with time, nor uniform over the globe

•	The size of this warming is broadly consistent with predictions of climate models, but it is also of the same magnitude as natural climate variability Thus the observed increase could be largely due to this natural variability, alternatively this variability and other human factors could have offset a still larger human-induced greenhouse warming The uneq

uivocal detection of the enhanced greenhouse effect from observations is not likely for a decade or more

•	There is no firm evidence that climate has become more variable over the last few decades However, with an increase in the mean temperature, episodes of high temperatures will most likely become more frequent in the future, and cold episodes less frequent

•	Ecosystems affect climate, and will be affected by a changing climate and by increasing carbon dioxide concentrations Rapid changes m climate will change the composition of ecosystems, some species will benefit while others will be unable to migrate or adapt fast enough and may become extinct Enhanced levels of carbon dioxide may increase productivity and efficiency of water use of vegetation The effect of warming on biological processes, although poorly understood, may increase the atmospheric concentrations of natural greenhouse gases

To improve our predictive capability, we need:

•	to understand better the various climate-related processes, particularly those associated with clouds, oceans and the carbon cycle

•	to improve the systematic observation of climate-related variables on a global basis, and further investigate changes which took place in the past

•	to develop improved models of the Earth's climate system

•	to increase support for national and international climate research activities, especially in developing countries

•	to facilitate international exchange of climate data

Introduction: what is the issue ?

There is concern that human activities may be inadvertently changing the climate of the globe through the enhanced greenhouse effect, by past and continuing emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases which will cause the temperature of the Earth's surface to increase - popularly termed the "global warming' If this occurs, consequent changes may have a significant impact on society

The purpose of the Working Group I report, as determined by the first meeting of IPCC, is to provide a scientific assessment of

1)	the factors which may'affect climate change during the next century, especially those which are due to human activity

2)	the responses of the atmosphere - ocean - land - ice system

3)	current capabilities of modelling global and regional climate changes and their predictability

4)	the past climate record and presently observed climate anomalies

On the basis of this assessment, the report presents current knowledge regarding predictions of climate change (including sea level rise and the effects on ecosystems) over the next century, the timing of changes together with an assessment of the uncertainties associated with these predictions

This Policymakers Summary aims to bring out those elements of the main report which have the greatest relevance to policy formulation, in answering the following questions

•	What factors determine global climate9

•	What are the greenhouse gases, and how and why are they increasing9

•	Which gases are the most important9

•	How much do we expect the climate to change9

•	How much confidence do we have in our predictions9

•	Will the climate of the future be very different 9

•	Have human activities already begun to change global climate9

•	How much will sea level rise9

•	What will be the effects on ecosystems9

•	What should be done to reduce uncertainties, and how long will this take9

This report is intended to respond to the practical needs of the policymaker It is neither an academic review, nor a plan for a new research programme Uncertainties attach to almost every aspect of the issue, yet policymakers are looking for clear guidance from scientists, hence authors

have been asked to provide their best-estimates wherever possible, together with an assessment of the uncertainties

This report is a summary of our understanding in 1990 Although continuing research will deepen this understanding and require the report to be updated at frequent intervals, basic conclusions concerning the reality of the enhanced greenhouse effect and its potential to alter global climate are unlikely to change significantly Nevertheless, the complexity of the system may give rise to surprises

What factors determine global climate ?

There are many factors, both natural and of human origin, that determine the climate of the earth We look first at those which are natural, and then see how human activities might contribute

What natural factors are important?

The driving energy for weather and climate comes from the Sun The Earth intercepts solar radiation (including that in the short-wave, visible, part of the spectrum), about a third of it is reflected, the rest is absorbed by the different components (atmosphere, ocean, ice, land and biota) of the climate system The energy absorbed from solar radiation is balanced (in the long term) by outgoing radiation from the Earth and atmosphere, this terrestrial radiation takes the form of long-wave invisible infrared energy, and its magnitude is determined by the temperature of the Earthatmosphere system

There are several natural factors which can change the balance between the energy absorbed by the Earth and that emitted by it in the form of longwave infrared radiation these factors cause the radiative forcing on climate The most obvious of these is a change in the output of energy from the Sun There is direct evidence of such variability over the 11-year solar cycle, and longer period changes may also occur Slow variations in the Earth s orbit al feet the seasonal and latitudinal distribution of solar radiation these were probably responsible for initiating the ice ages

One of the most important factors is the greenhouse effect, a simplified explanation of which is as follows Short-wave solar radiation can pass through the clear atmosphere relatively unimpeded But long-wave terrestrial radiation emitted by the warm surface of the Earth is partially absorbed and then re-emitted by a number of trace gases in the cooler atmosphere above Since, on average, the outgoing long wave radiation balances the incoming solar radiation both the atmosphere and the surface will be warmer than they would be without the greenhouse gases



X



£

Some solar radiation is reflected by the earth and the atmosphere

*5

™ radiation

'; passes through W

:5: the Clear Sj:?:: ® atmosphere

x*fei:

Some of the infra-red ** radiation is absorbed and re-emitted by the greenhouse gases, ws The effect of this is to warm the surface and the lower atmosphere





sAjMgSPHERE^

Most radiation is absorbed

by the earth's surface EARTH and warms it.

Infra-red radiation is emitted from the earth's surface

Figure 1: A simplified diagram illustrating the greenhouse effect.

The main natural greenhouse gases are not the major constituents, nitrogen and oxygen, but water vapour (the biggest contributor), carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone in the troposphere (the lowest 10-15km of the atmosphere) and stratosphere.

Aerosols (small particles) in the atmosphere can also affect climate because they can reflect and absorb radiation. The most important natural perturbations result from explosive volcanic eruptions which affect con-centrations in the lower stratosphere. Lastly, the climate has its own natural variability on all timescales and changes occur without any external influence.

How do we know that the natural greenhouse effect is real?

The greenhouse effect is real; it is a well understood effect, based on established scientific principles. We know that the greenhouse effect works in practice, for several reasons.

Firstly, the mean temperature of the Earth's surface is already warmer by about 33°C (assuming the same reflectivity of the earth) than it would be if the natural greenhouse gases were not present. Satellite observations of the radiation emitted from the Earth's surface and through the atmosphere demonstrate the effect of the greenhouse gases.

Secondly, we know the composition of the atmospheres of Venus, Earth and Mars are very different, and their

surface temperatures are in general agreement with greenhouse theory.

Thirdly, measurements from ice cores going back 160,000 years show that the Earth's temperature closely paralleled the amount of carbon dioxide and methane in the atmosphere (see Figure 2). Although we do not know the details of cause and effect, calculations indicate that changes in these greenhouse gases were part, but not all, of the reason for the large (5-7”C) global temperature swings between ice ages and interglacial periods.

How might human activities change global climate?

Naturally occurring greenhouse gases keep the Earth warm enough to be habitable. By increasing their concentrations, and by adding new greenhouse gases like chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), humankind is capable of raising the global-average annual-mean surface-air temperature (which, for simplicity, is referred to as the "global temperature"), although we are uncertain about the rate at which this will occur. Strictly, this is an enhanced greenhouse effect - above that occurring due to natural greenhouse gas concentrations; the word "enhanced" is usually omitted, but it should not be forgotten. Other changes in climate are expected to result, for example changes in precipitation, and a global wanning will cause sea levels to rise; these are discussed in more detail later.



E

Q. CL

o z o o

AGE (THOUSAND YEARS BEFORE PRESENT)

Figure 2: Analysis of air trapped in Antarctic ice cores shows that methane and carbon dioxide concentrations weie closely correlated with the local temperature over the last 160 000 years Present day concentrations of carbon dioxide are indicated

There are other human activities which have the potential to affect climate A change in the albedo (reflectivity) of the land, brought about by desertification or deforestation affects the amount of solar energy absorbed at the Earth s surface Human-made aerosols, fiom sulphur emitted largely in fossil fuel combustion can modify clouds and this may act to lower tempeiatures Lastly, changes in ozone in the stratosphere due to CFCs may also influence climate

What are the greenhouse gases and why are they increasing?

We aie certain that the concentiations of gieenhouse gases in the atmosphere have changed natuially on ice-age timescales and have been increasing since pre-industrial times due to human activities Table 1 summanzes the present and pie-industi lai abundances, cuirent rates of change and picscnt atmospheric lifetimes of gieenhouse gases influenced by human activities Cai bon dioxide methane

and nitrous oxide all have significant natural and human sources, while the chlorofluorocarbons are only produced industrially

Two important greenhouse gases, water vapoui and ozone, are not included in this table Water vapour has the largest greenhouse effect, but its concentration in the troposphere is determined internally within the climate system, and, on a global scale, is not affected by human sources and sinks Water vapour will increase in response to global warming and further enhance it, this process is included in climate models The concentration of ozone is changing both in the stratosphere and the troposphere due to human activities, but it is difficult to quantity the changes from present observations

For a thousand years prior to the industrial revolution, abundances of the greenhouse gases weie relatively constant However, as the world s population inci eased as the world became more industrialized and as agriculture developed, the abundances of the greenhouse gases increased markedly Figure 3 illustrates this for carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and CFC 11

Since the mdustilai revolution the combustion of fossil fuels and deforestation have led to an increase ol 269f in carbon dioxide concentiation in the atmospheie We know the magnitude of the present day fossil-fuel source, but the input from deforestation cannot be estimated accurately In addition, although about half of the emitted carbon dioxide stays in the atmosphere, we do not know well how much of the remainder is absorbed by the oceans and how much by terrestrial biota Emissions of chloiofluorocaibons used as aerosol propellants, solvents refrigeiants and loam blowing agents, are also well known, they were not present in the atmosphere before their invention in the 1930s

The sources of methane and nitrous oxide aie less well known Methane concentrations have nroie than doubled because of rice production cattle reanng biomass burning coal mining and ventilation ol natuial gas also fossil fuel combustion may have also conliibuled thiough chemical reactions in the atmosphere which ieduce the iale ol removal of methane Nitrous oxide has incieased by about 8% since pie-industi lai times picsumably due to human activities, we arc unable to specify the sources but it is likely that agriculture plays a pait

The effect of ozone on climate is strongest in the upper troposphere and lower stiatosphere Model calculations indicate that ozone in the upper tiopospheie should have increased due to human-made emissions of nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide While at giound level ozone has increased in the Northern Hemisphere in response to these emissions observations are insufficient to confnm the expected inciease in the uppei tiopospheie The lack of adequate obseivations pievents us from accuiately quantifying the climatic effect of changes in tioposphcric ozone

Table 1: Summaiy of Key Gi eenhouse Gases Affected by Human Activities

	Carbon  Dioxide	Methane	CFC-11	CFC-12	Nitrous  Oxide
Atmospheric concentration	ppmv	ppmv	pptv	PPtv	ppbv
Pre-industnal (1750-1800)	280	08	0	0	288
Present day (1990)	353	1 72	280	484	310
Current rate of change per year	1 8  (0.5%)	0015  (0 9%)	9.5  (4%)	17  (4%)	0.8 (0.25%)
Atmospheric lifetime (years)	(50-200)t	10	65	130	150

ppmv = parts per million by volume,

ppbv = parts per billion (thousand million) by volume,

pptv = parts per trillion (million million) by volume

t The way in which CO2 is absorbed by the oceans and biosphere is not simple and a single value cannot be given, refer to the mam report for further discussion

N20 CONCENTRATION (ppbv)	CO2 CONCENTRATION (ppmv)

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

„	0.3

»

1750	1800	1850	1900	1950	2000

YEAR

CM o o

o t—

<

0C

o o

LU o

> E a a.

YEAR

Figure 4: The relationship between hypothetical fossil fuel emissions of carbon dioxide and its concentration in the atmosphere is shown in the case where (a) emissions continue at 1990 levels, (b) emissions are reduced by 50% in 1990 and continue at that level, (c) emissions are reduced by 2% pa from 1990, and (d) emissions, after increasing by 2% pa until 2010, are then reduced by 2% pa thereafter

500

400

_	2% pa DECREASE .  FROM 2010
■
'	2% pa DECREASE  ■ /	FROM 1990	■

(d)

(c)

300

1980 2000 2020 2040	2060 2080 2100

YEAR

In the lower stratosphere at high southern latitudes ozone has decreased considerably due to the effects of CFCs, and there are indications of a global-scale decrease which, while not understood, may also be due to CFCs These observed decreases should act to cool the earth's surface, thus providing a small offset to the predicted warming produced by the other greenhouse gases Further reductions in lower stratospheric ozone are possible during the next few decades as the atmospheric abundances of CFCs continue to increase

Concentrations, lifetimes and stabilisation of the gases In order to calculate the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide which will result from human-made emissions we use computer models which incorporate details of the emissions and which include representations of the transfer of carbon dioxide between the atmosphere, oceans and terrestrial biosphere For the other greenhouse gases, models which incorporate the effects of chemical reactions in the atmosphere are employed

The atmospheric lifetimes of the gases are determined by their sources and sinks in the oceans, atmosphere and biosphere Carbon dioxide, chlorofluorocarbons and nitrous oxide are removed only slowly from the atmosphere and hence, following a change in emissions, their atmospheric concentrations take decades to centuries to adjust fully Even if all human-made emissions of carbon dioxide were halted in the year 1990, about half of the increase in carbon dioxide concentration caused by human activities would still be evident by the year 2100

In contrast, some of the CFC substitutes and methane have relatively short atmospheric lifetimes so that their atmospheric concentrations respond fully to emission changes within a few decades

To illustrate the emission-concentration relationship clearly, the effect of hypothetical changes in carbon dioxide fossil fuel emissions is shown in Figure 4 (a) continuing global emissions at 1990 levels, (b) halving of emissions in 1990, (c) reductions in emissions of 2% per year (pa) from 1990 and (d) a 2% pa increase from 1990-2010 followed by a 2% pa decrease from 2010

Continuation of present day emissions are committing us to increased future concentrations, and the longer emissions continue to increase, the greater would reductions have to be to stabilise at a given level If there are critical concentration levels that should not be exceeded, then the earlier emission reductions are made the more effective they are

The term "atmospheric stabilisation" is often used to describe the limiting of the concentration of the greenhouse gases at a certain level The amount by which human-made emissions of a greenhouse gas must be reduced in order to stabilise at present day concentrations, for example, is shown in Table 2 For most gases the reductions would have to be substantial

How will greenhouse gas abundances change in the future?

We need to know future greenhouse gas concentrations in order to estimate future climate change As already mentioned, these concentrations depend upon the magnitude of human-made emissions and on how changes in climate and other environmental conditions may influence the biospheric processes that control the exchange of natural greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide and methane between the atmosphere, oceans and terrestrial biosphere the greenhouse gas 'feedbacks

Table 2: Stabilisation of Atmospheiic Concentiations Reductions in the human-made emissions of gieenhouse gases i ec/uu ed to stabilise c one enti ations at pi esent day les els

Greenhouse Gas	Reduction Required
Carbon Dioxide	>60%
Methane	15 - 20%
Nitrous Oxide	70	80%
CFC 11	70 - 75%
CFC 12	75 - 85%
HCFC 22	40 - 50%

Note that the stabilisation of each of these gases would have different effects on climate, as explained in the next section

Four scenarios of future human-made emissions were developed by Working Group III The first of these assumes that few or no steps are taken to limit greenhouse gas emissions and this is therefore termed Business-as-Usual (BaU) (It should be noted that an aggregation of national forecasts ol emissions of carbon dioxide and methane to the year 2025 undertaken by Working Group III resulted in global emissions 10-20% higher than in the BaU scenano) The other thiee scenarios assume that progressively increasing levels of controls reduce the giowth ol emissions these aie refened to as scenarios B, C, and D They arc bi icily dcscubcd in the Annex to this summary Future concentiations of some of the greenhouse gases which would arise tiom these emissions are shown in Figure 5

Greenhouse gas feedbacks

Some ol the possible feedbacks which could significantly modify future greenhouse gas concentrations in a warmer woild aic discussed in the following paragraphs

The net emissions ol carbon dioxide from terrestrial ecosystems will be elevated if higher temperatures increase lespiration at a faster rate than photosynthesis or if plant populations particularly large forests, cannot adjust rapidly enough to changes in climate

A net flux of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere may be particularly evident in warmer conditions in tundra and boieal legions wheie there are large stores of carbon The opposite is true if higher abundances of carbon dioxide tn the atmosphere enhance the productivity of natural ecosystems or if there is an increase in soil moisture which can be expected to stimulate plant growth in dry ecosystems and to increase the storage of carbon in tundra peat The extent to which ecosystems can sequester inci easing atmosphei ic carbon dioxide remains to be quantilicd

Il	the oceans become wanner, their net uptake of carbon dioxide may decrease because of changes in (i) the

chemistry of carbon dioxide in seawater, (n) biological activity in surface waters, and (in) the rate of exchange of carbon dioxide between the surface layers and the deep ocean This last depends upon the rate of formation of deep water in the ocean which, in the North Atlantic for example, might decrease if the salinity decreases as a result of a change in climate

Methane emissions from natural wetlands and rice paddies are particularly sensitive to temperature and soil moisture Emissions are significantly larger at higher tempcratuics and with increased soil moisture, conversely, a decrease in soil moisture would lesult in smaller emissions Higher temperatures could increase the emissions of methane at high northern latitudes from decomposable organic matter trapped in permafrost and methane hydrates

As illustrated earlier, ice core iccords show that methane and carbon dioxide concentrations changed in a similar sense to temperature between ice ages and mterglacials

Although many of these feedback processes are poorly understood, it seems likely that, overall, they will act to increase, rather than decrease, greenhouse gas con centrations in a warmei world

Which gases are the most important?

We are certain that increased greenhouse gas concentrations increase radiative lorcing We can calculate the forcing with much more confidence than the climate change that results because the former avoids the need to evaluate a number of poorly understood atmospheric responses We then have a base lrom which to calculate the ielativc effect on climate of an increase in concentration of each gas in the piesent-day atmosphere both in absolute teims and ielativc to caibon dioxide These ielativc ellccts span a wide langc methane is about 21 times more effective molecule loi-molecule, than carbon dioxide, and CFC 11 about 12,000 times more effective On a kilogram

CFC11 CONCENTRATION (pptv)	CH4 CONCENTRATION (ppbv)	CO2 CONCENTRATION (ppmv)

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Figure 5: Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide methane and CFC-l l resulting from the four IPCC emissions scenarios

per-kilogram basts, the equivalent values are 58 for methane and about 4,000 for CFC-l l, both relative to carbon dioxide Values for other greenhouse gases are to be found in Section 2

The total iadiative foicing at any time is the sum of those from the individual greenhouse gases We show in Figuie 6

how this quantity has changed in the past (based on observations of greenhouse gases) and how it might change in the future (based on the four IPCC emissions scenarios) For simplicity, we can express total forcing in terms of the amount of carbon dioxide which would give that forcing, this is termed the equivalent carbon dioxide concentration Greenhouse gases have increased since pre-mdustnal times (the mid-18th century) by an amount that is radiatively equivalent to about a 50% increase in carbon dioxide, although carbon dioxide itself has risen by only 26%, other gases have made up the rest

The contributions of the various gases to the total increase in climate forcing during the 1980s is shown as a pie diagram in Figure 7, carbon dioxide is responsible for about half the decadal increase (Ozone, the effects of which may be significant, is not included)

How can we evaluate the effect of different greenhouse gases?

To evaluate possible policy options, it is useful to know the relative radiative effect (and, hence, potential climate effect) of equal emissions of each of the greenhouse gases The concept of relative Global Warming Potentials (GWP) has been developed to take into account the differing times that gases remain in the atmosphere

This index defines the time-integrated warming effect due to an instantaneous release of unit mass (1 kg) of a given greenhouse gas in today's atmosphere, relative to that of carbon dioxide The relative importances will change in the future as atmospheric composition changes because although radiative forcing increases in direct proportion to the concentration of CFCs, changes in the other greenhouse gases (particularly carbon dioxide) have an effect on forcing which is much less than proportional

The GWPs in Table 3 are shown for three time horizons reflecting the need to consider the cumulative effects on climate over various time scales The longer lime horizon is appropriate for the cumulative effect the shorter timescale will indicate the response to emission changes in the short term There are a number of practical difficulties in devising and calculating the values of the GWPs and the values given here should be considered as preliminary In addition to these direct effects, there are indirect effects of human-made emissions arising from chemical reactions between the various constituents The indirect effects on stratospheric water vapour, carbon dioxide and trop osphcnc ozone have been included in these estimates

Table 3 indicates, for example that the effectiveness of methane in influencing climate will be greatei in the first few decades aftei ieleasc whcieas emission of the longci lived mtious oxide will affect climate foi a much longci time The lifetimes of the pioposcd CFC replacements tango from 1 to 40 years the longci lived leplaccments are

> E Q. Q.

3 o LU

YEAR

C4

O O

<

>

Z o

H

< (X H Z

LU

O O

Figure 6: Increase in radiative forcing since the mid-18th century, and predicted to result from the four IPCC emissions scenarios, also expressed as equivalent carbon dioxide concentrations.

Figure 7: The contribution from each of the human-made greenhouse gases to the change in radiative forcing from 1980 to 1990. The contribution from ozone may also be significant, but cannot be quantified at present.

still potentially effective as agents of climate change. One example of this, HCFC-22 (with a 15 year lifetime), has a similar effect (when released in the same amount) as CFC-11 on a 20 year time-scale; but less over a 500 year timescale.

Table 3 shows carbon dioxide to be the least effective greenhouse gas per kilogramme emitted, but its contribution to global warming, which depends on the product of the GWP and the amount emitted, is largest. In the example in Tabic 4, the effect over 100 years of emissions

of greenhouse gases in 1990 are shown relative to carbon dioxide. This is illustrative; to compare the effect of different emission projections we have to sum the effect of emissions made in future years.

There are other technical criteria which may help policymakers to decide, in the event of emissions reductions being deemed necessary, which gases should be considered. Does the gas contribute in a major way to current, and future, climate forcing? Does it have a long lifetime, so earlier reductions in emissions would be more effective than those made later? And are its sources and sinks well enough known to decide which could be controlled in practice? Table 5 illustrates these factors.

How much do we expect climate to change?

It is relatively easy to determine the direct effect of the increased radiative forcing due to increases in greenhouse gases. However, as climate begins to warm, various processes act to amplify (through positive feedbacks) or reduce (through negative feedbacks) the warming. The main feedbacks which have been identified are due to changes in water vapour, sea-ice, clouds and the oceans.

The best tools we have which take the above feedbacks into account (but do not include greenhouse gas feedbacks) are three-dimensional mathematical models of the climate system (atmospherc-ocean-ice-land), known as General Circulation Models (GCMs). They synthesise our knowledge of the physical and dynamical processes in the overall system and allow for the complex interactions between the various components. However, in their current state of development, the descriptions of many of the processes involved are comparatively crude. Because of this, considerable uncertainty is attached to these

Table 3 Global Warming Potentials The warming effect of an emission of 1kg of each gas relative to that ofCC>2 These figures are best estimates calculated on the basis of the pi esent day atmospheric composition

	TIME HORIZON  20 yr	100 yr	500 yr
Carbon dioxide	1	1	1
Methane (including indirect)	63	21	9
Nitrous oxide	270	290	190
CFC-11	4500	3500	1500
CFC-12	7100	7300	4500
HCFC-22	4100	1500	510

Global Warming Potentials for a range of CFCs and potential replacements are given in the full text.

Table 4 The Relative Cumulative Climate Effect of 1990 Man-Made Emissions

	GWP  (lOOyr horizon)	1990 emissions (Tg)	Relative contribution over lOOyr
Carbon dioxide	1	26000J	61%
Methane*	21	300	15%
Nitrous oxide	290	6	4%
CFCs	Various	09	11%
HCFC-22	1500	0 1	0.5%
Others*	Various		8.5%

* These values include the indirect effect of these emissions on other greenhouse gases via chemical reactions in the atmosphere Such estimates are highly model dependent and should be considered preliminary and subject to change The estimated effect of ozone is included under "others" The gases included under "others" are given in the full report.

t 26 000 Tg (teragrams) of carbon dioxide = 7 000 Tg (=7 Gt) of carbon

Table 5 Characteristics of Greenhouse Gases

GAS

MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR? LONG LIFETIME? SOURCES KNOWN?

Carbon dioxide

Methane

Nitrous oxide

CFCs

HCFCs, etc

Ozone

yes

yes

not at present

yes

not at present possibly

yes	yes
no	semi-quantitatively
yes	qualitatively
yes	yes
mainly no	yes
no	qualitatively

predictions of climate change, which is reflected in the range of values given, further details are given in a latex section

The estimates of climate change presented here are based on

I)	the "best-estimate" of equilibrium climate sensitivity (1 e the equilibrium temperature change due to a doubling of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere) obtained from model simulations, feedback analyses and observational considerations (see later box "What tools do we use9")

II)	a "box-diffusion-upwelling" ocean-atmosphere climate model which translates the greenhouse forcing into the evolution of the temperature response for the prescribed climate sensitivity (This simple model has been calibrated against more complex atm-osphere-ocean coupled GCMs for situations where the more complex models have been run)

How quickly will global climate change?

a If emissions follow a Busmess-as-U sual pattern

Under the IPCC Business-as-Usual (Scenario A) emissions of greenhouse gases, the average rate of increase of global mean temperature during the next century is estimated to be about 0 3°C per decade (with an uncertainty range of 0 2°C to 0 5°C) This will result in a likely increase in global mean temperature of about 1°C above the present value (about 2°C above that in the pre-industnal period) by 2025 and 3°C above today's (about 4°C above pre-industrial) before the end of the next century

The projected temperature rise out to the year 2100, with high, low and best-estimate climate responses, is shown in Figure 8 Because of other factors which influence climate, we would not expect the rise to be a steady one

The temperature rises shown above are realised temperatures, at any time we would also be committed to a further temperature rise toward the equilibrium temperature (see box "Equilibrium and Realised Climate Change") For the BaU "best-estimate" case in the year 2030, for example, a further 0 9°C rise would be expected, about 0 2°C of which would be realised by 2050 (in addition to changes due to further greenhouse gas increases), the rest would become apparent in decades or centuries

Even if we were able to stabilise emissions of each of the greenhouse gases at present day levels from now on, the temperature is predicted to rise by about 0 2°C per decade for the first few decades

The global warming will also lead to increased global average precipitation and evaporation of a few percent by 2030 Areas of sea-ice and snow are expected to diminish

b If emissions ai e subjec t to < onti ols

Under the other IPCC emission scenarios which assume progressively increasing levels of controls, average rates of increase in global mean temperature over the next century are estimated to be about 0 2°C per decade (Scenario B), just above 0 1°C per decade (Scenario C) and about 0.1 °C per decade (Scenario D) The results are illustrated in Figure 9, with the Business-as-Usual case shown for comparison Only the best-estimate of the temperature rise is shown in each case

YEAR

Figure 8: Simulation of the increase in global mean temperature from 1850-1990 due to observed increases in greenhouse gases, and predictions of the rise between 1990 and 2100 resulting from the Business-as-Usual emissions

YEAR

Figure 9: Simulations of the increase in global mean temperature from 1850-1990 due to observed increases in greenhouse gases, and predictions of the rise between 1990 and 2100 resulting from the IPCC Scenario B,C and D emissions, with the Business-as Usual case for comparison

The indicated range of uncertainty in global temperature rise given above reflects a subjective assessment of uncertainties in the calculation of climate response, but does not include those due to the transformation of emissions to concentrations, nor the effects of greenhouse gas feedbacks

What will be the patterns of climate change by 2030?

Knowledge of the global mean warming and change in precipitation is of limited use in determining the impacts of climate change, for instance on agriculture For this we need to know changes regionally and seasonally

Models predict that surface air will warm faster over land than over oceans, and a minimum of warming will occur around Antarctica and in the northern North Atlantic region

There are some continental-scale changes which are consistently predicted by the highest resolution models and for which we understand the physical reasons The warming is predicted to be 50-100% greater than the global mean in high northern latitudes in winter, and substantially smaller than the global mean in regions of sea-ice in summer Precipitation is predicted to increase on average in middle and high latitude continents in winter (by some 5 -10% over 35-55°N)

Five regions, each a few million square kilometres in area and representative of different climatological regimes, were selected by IPCC for particular study (see Figure 10) In the box (over page) are given the changes in temperature, precipitation and soil moisture, which are predicted to occur by 2030 on the Business-as-Usual scenario, as an average over each of the five regions There

may be considerable variations within the regions In general, confidence in these regional estimates is low, especially for the changes in precipitation and soil moisture, but they are examples of our best estimates We cannot yet give reliable regional predictions at the smaller scales demanded for impacts assessments

How will climate extremes and extreme events change?

Changes in the variability of weather and the frequency of extremes will generally have more impact than changes in the mean climate at a particular location With the possible exception of an increase in the number of intense showers there is no clear evidence that weather variability will change in the future In the case of temperatures, assuming no change in variability, but with a modest increase in the mean, the number of days with temperatures above a given value at the high end of the distribution will increase substantially On the same assumptions, there will be a decrease in days with temperatures at the low end of the distribution So the number of very hot days or frosty nights can be substantially changed without any change in the variability of the weather The number of days with a minimum threshold amount of soil moisture (for viability of a certain crop, for example) would be even more sensitive to changes in average precipitation and evaporation

If the large-scale weather regimes, for instance depression tracks or anticyclones, shift their position this would effect the vai lability and extremes of weather at a particular location, and could have a major effect However, we do not know if, or in what way, this will happen

ESTIMATES FOR CHANGES BY 2030

(IPCC Business-as-Usual scenario; changes from pre-industrial)

The numbers given below are based on high resolution models, scaled to be consistent with our best estimate of global mean warming of 1.8°C by 2030. For values consistent with other estimates of global temperature rise, the numbers below should be reduced by 30% for the low estimate or increased by 50% for the high estimate. Precipitation estimates are also scaled in a similar way.

Confidence in these regional estimates is low

Central North America (35 °-50 °N 85 °-105 °W)

The warming varies from 2 to 4°C in winter and 2 to 3°C in summer. Precipitation increases range from 0 to 15% in winter whereas there are decreases of 5 to 10% in summer. Soil moisture decreases in summer by 15 to 20%.

Southern Asia (5°-30°N 70°-105°E)

The warming varies from 1 to 2°C throughout the year. Precipitation changes little in winter and generally increases throughout the region by 5 to 15% in summer. Summer soil moisture increases by 5 to 10%.

Sahel (10 °-20 °N 20 °W-40 °E)

The warming ranges from 1 to 3°C. Area mean precipitation increases and area mean soil moisture decreases marginally in summer. However, throughout the region, there are areas of both increase and decrease in both parameters throughout the region.

Southern Europe (35°-50°N 10°W- 45°E)

The warming is about 2°C in winter and varies from 2 to 3°C in summer. There is some indication of increased precipitation in winter, but summer precipitation decreases by 5 to 15%, and summer soil moisture by 15 to 25%.

Australia (12 °-45°S 110°-115°E)

The warming ranges from 1 to 2°C in summer and is about 2°C in winter. Summer precipitation increases by around 10%, but the models do not produce consistent estimates of the changes in soil moisture. The area averages hide large variations at the sub-continental level.



Figure 10: Map showing the locations and extents of the five areas selected by IPCC

WHAT TOOLS DO WE USE TO PREDICT FUTURE CLIMATE, AND HOW DO WE USE THEM?

The most highly developed tool which we have to predict future climate is known as a general circulation model or GCM. These models are based on the laws of physics and use descriptions in simplified physical terms (called parameterisations) of the smaller-scale processes such as those due to clouds and deep mixing in the ocean. In a climate model an atmospheric component, essentially the same as a weather prediction model, is coupled to a model of the ocean, which can be equally complex.

Climate forecasts are derived in a different way from weather forecasts. A weather prediction model gives a description of the atmosphere's state up to 10 days or so ahead, starting from a detailed description of an initial state of the atmosphere at a given time. Such forecasts describe the movement and development of large weather systems, though they cannot represent very small scale phenomena; for example, individual shower clouds.

To make a climate forecast, the climate model is first run for a few (simulated) decades. The statistics of the model's output is a description of the model's simulated climate which, if the model is a good one, will bear a close resemblance to the climate of the real atmosphere and ocean. The above exercise is then repeated with increasing concentrations of the greenhouse gases in the model. The differences between the statistics of the two simulations (for example in mean temperature and interannual variability) provide an estimate of the accompanying climate change.

The long term change in surface air temperature following a doubling of carbon dioxide (referred to as the climate sensitivity) is generally used as a benchmark to compare models. The range of results from model studies is 1.9 to 5.2°C. Most results are close to 4.0°C but recent studies using a more detailed but not necessarily more accurate representation of cloud processes give results in the lower half of this range. Hence the models results do not justify altering the previously accepted range of 1.5 to 4.5°C.

Although scientists are reluctant to give a single best estimate in this range, it is necessary for the presentation of climate predictions for a choice of best estimate to be made. Taking into account the model results, together with observational evidence over the last century which is suggestive of the climate sensitivity being in the lower half of the range, (see section: "Has man already begun to change global climate?") a value of climate sensitivity of 2.5°C has been chosen as the best estimate. Further details are given in Section 5 of the report.

In this Assessment, we have also used much simpler models, which simulate the behaviour of GCMs, to make predictions of the evolution with time of global temperature from a number of emission scenarios. These so-called box-diffusion models contain highly simplified physics but give similar results to GCMs when globally averaged.

A completely different, and potentially useful, way of predicting patterns of future climate is to search for periods in the past when the global mean temperatures were similar to those we expect in future, and then use the past spatial patterns as analogues of those which will arise in the future. For a good analogue, it is also necessary for the forcing factors (for example, greenhouse gases, orbital variations) and other conditions (for example, ice cover, topography, etc.) to be similar; direct comparisons with climate situations for which these conditions do not apply cannot be easily interpreted. Analogues of future greenhouse-gas-changed climates have not been found.

We cannot therefore advocate the use of palaeo-climates as predictions of regional climate change due to future increases in greenhouse gases. However, palaeo-climatological information can provide useful insights into climate processes, and can assist in the validation of climate models.

Will storms increase in a warmer world?

Storms can have a major impact on society. Will their frequency, intensity or location increase in a warmer world?

Tropical storms, such as typhoons and hurricanes, only develop at present over seas that are warmer than about 26°C. Although the area of sea having temperatures over this critical value will increase as the globe warms, the critical temperature itself may increase in a warmer world.

Although the theoretical maximum intensity is expected to increase with temperature, climate models give no consistent indication whether tropical storms will increase or decrease in frequency or intensity as climate changes; neither is there any evidence that this has occurred over the past few decades.

Mid-latitude storms, such as those which track across the North Atlantic and North Pacific, are driven by the equator-to-pole temperature contrast. As this contrast will

mi

Polic xmakei s Summai y

EQUILIBRIUM AND REALISED CLIMATE CHANGE

When the radiative forcing on the earth-atmosphere system is changed, for example by increasing greenhouse gas concentrations, the atmosphere will try to respond (by wanning) immediately But the atmosphere is closely coupled to the oceans, so in order for the air to be wanned by the greenhouse el feet, the oceans also have to be warmed, because of their thermal capacity this takes decades or centuries This exchange of heat between atmosphere and ocean will act to slow down the temperature rise forced by the gieenhouse effect

In a hypothetical example where the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, following a period of constancy, rises suddenly to a new level and remains there, the radiative forcing would also rise rapidly to a new level This increased radiative forcing would cause the atmosphere and oceans to warm, and eventually come to a new, stable, temperature A commitment to this equilibrium temperature rise is incurred as soon as the greenhouse gas concentration changes But at any time before equilibrium is reached, the actual temperature will have risen by only part of the equilibrium temperature change, known as the realised temperature change

Models predict that, for the present day case of an increase in radiative forcing which is approximately steady, the realised temperature rise at any time is about 50% of the committed temperature rise if the climate sensitivity (the response to a doubling of carbon dioxide) is 4 5°C and about 80% if the climate sensitivity is 1 5°C If the forcing were then held constant, temperatures would continue to rise slowly, but it is not certain whether it would take decades or centuries for most of the remaining rise to equilibrium to occur

EQUILIBRIUM

probably be weakened in a warmer world (at least in the Northern Hemisphere), it might be argued that mid-latitude storms will also weaken or change their tracks, and there is some indication of a general reduction in day-to-day variability in the mid-latitude storm tracks in winter in model simulations, though the pattern of changes vary from model to model Present models do not resolve smaller-scale disturbances, so it will not be possible to assess

changes in storminess until results from higher resolution models become available in the next few years

Climate change in the longer term

The foregoing calculations have focussed on the period up to the year 2100, it is clearly more difficult to make calculations for years beyond 2100 However, while the timing of a predicted increase in global temperatures has

substantial uncertainties, the prediction that an increase will eventually occur is more certain Furthermore, some model calculations that have been extended beyond 100 years suggest that, with continued increases in greenhouse climate forcing, there could be significant changes in the ocean circulation, including a decrease in North Atlantic deep water formation

Other factors which could influence future climate

Variations in the output of solar energy may also affect climate On a decadal time-scale solar variability and changes in greenhouse gas concentration could give changes of similar magnitudes However the variation in solar intensity changes sign so that over longer time-scales the increases in greenhouse gases are likely to be more important Aerosols as a result of volcanic eruptions can lead to a cooling at the surface which may oppose the greenhouse warming for a few years following an eruption Again, over longer periods the greenhouse warming is likely to dominate

Human activity is leading to an increase in aerosols in the lower atmosphere, mainly from sulphur emissions These have two effects, both of which are difficult to quantify but which may be significant particularly at the regional level The first is the direct effect of the aerosols on the radiation scattered and absorbed by the atmosphere The second is an indirect effect whereby the aerosols affect the microphysics of clouds leading to an increased cloud reflectivity Both these effects might lead to a significant regional cooling, a decrease in emissions of sulphur might be expected to increase global temperatures

Because of long-period couplings between different components of the climate system, for example between ocean and atmosphere, the Earth's climate would still vary without being perturbed by any external influences This natural variability could act to add to, or subtract from, any human-made warming, on a century time-scale this would be less than changes expected from greenhouse gas increases

How much confidence do we have in our predictions?

Uncertainties in the above climate predictions arise from our imperfect knowledge of

•	future rates of human-made emissions

•	how these will change the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases

•	the response of climate to these changed concentrations

Firstly, it is obvious that the extent to which climate will change depends on the rate at which greenhouse gases (and other gases which affect their concentrations) are emitted This in turn will be determined by various complex

economic and sociological factors Scenarios of future emissions were generated within 1PCC WGIII and are described in the Annex to this Summary

Secondly, because we do not fully understand the sources and sinks of the greenhouse gases, there are uncertainties in our calculations of future concentrations arising from a given emissions scenario We have used a number of models to calculate concentrations and chosen a best estimate for each gas In the case of carbon dioxide, for example, the concentration increase between 1990 and 2070 due to the Business-as-Usual emissions scenario spanned almost a factor of two between the highest and lowest model result (corresponding to a range in radiative forcing change of about 50%)

Furthermore, because natural sources and sinks of greenhouse gases are sensitive to a change in climate, they may substantially modify future concentrations (see earlier section "Greenhouse gas feedbacks") It appears that, as climate warms, these feedbacks will lead to an overall increase, rather than decrease, in natural greenhouse gas abundances For this reason, climate change is likely to be greater than the estimates we have given

Thirdly, climate models are only as good as our understanding of the processes which they describe, and this is far from perfect The ranges in the climate predictions given above reflect the uncertainties due to model imperfections, the largest of these is cloud feedback (those factors affecting the cloud amount and distribution and the interaction of clouds with solar and terrestrial radiation), which leads to a factor of two uncertainty in the size of the warming Others arise from the transfer of energy between the atmosphere and ocean, the atmosphere and land surfaces, and between the upper and deep layers of the ocean The treatment of sea-ice and convection in the models is also crude Nevertheless, for reasons given in the box overleaf, we have substantial confidence that models can predict at least the broad scale features of climate change

Furthermore, we must recognise that our imperfect understanding of climate processes (and corresponding ability to model them) could make us vulnerable to surprises, just as the human made ozone hole over Antarctica was entirely unpredicted In particular, the ocean circulation, changes in which are thought to have led to periods of comparatively rapid climate change at the end of the last ice age, is not well observed, understood or modelled

Will the climate of the future be very different?

When considering future climate change, it is clearly essential to look at the record of climate variation in the past From it we can learn about the range of natural climate variability, to see how it compares with what we

CONFIDENCE IN PREDICTIONS FROM CLIMATE MODELS

What confidence can we have that climate change due to increasing greenhouse gases will look anything like the model predictions9 Weather forecasts can be compared with the actual weather the next day and their skill assessed, we cannot do that with climate predictions However, there are several indicators that give us some confidence in the predictions from climate models

When the latest atmospheric models are run with the present atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and observed boundary conditions their simulation of present climate is generally realistic on large scales, capturing the major features such as the wet tropical convergence zones and mid-latitude depression belts, as well as the contrasts between summer and winter circulations The models also simulate the observed variability, for example, the large day-to-day pressure variations in the middle latitude depression belts and the maxima in mterannual variability responsible for the very different character of one winter from another both being represented However, on regional scales (2,000km or less), there are significant errors in all models

Overall confidence is increased by atmospheric models' generally satisfactory portrayal of aspects of variability of the atmosphere, for instance those associated with variations in sea surface temperature There has been some success in simulating the general circulation of the ocean, including the patterns (though not always the intensities) of the principal currents, and the distributions of tracers added to the ocean

Atmospheric models have been coupled with simple models of the ocean to predict the equilibrium response to greenhouse gases, under the assumption that the model errors are the same in a changed climate The ability of such models to simulate important aspects of the climate of the last ice age generates confidence in their usefulness Atmospheric models have also been coupled with multi-layer ocean models (to give coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs) which predict the gradual response to increasing greenhouse gases Although the models so far are of relatively coarse resolution, the large scale structures of the ocean and the atmosphere can be simulated with some skill However, the coupling of ocean and atmosphere models reveals a strong sensitivity to small-scale errors which leads to a drift away from the observed climate As yet, these errors must be removed by adjustments to the exchange of heat between ocean and atmosphere There are similarities between results from the coupled models using simple representations of the ocean and those using more sophisticated descriptions, and our understanding of such differences as do occur gives us some confidence in the results

expect in the future, and also look for evidence of recent climate change due to man's activities

Climate varies naturally on all time-scales from hundreds of millions of years down to the year-to-year Prominent in the Earth's history have been the 100,000 year glacial-mterglacial cycles when climate was mostly cooler than at present Global surface temperatures have typically varied by 5-7°C through these cycles, with large changes in ice volume and sea level, and temperature changes as great as 10-15°C in some middle and high latitude regions of the Northern Hemisphere Since the end of the last ice age, about 10,000 years ago, global surface temperatures have probably fluctuated by little more than 1°C Some fluctuations have lasted several centuries, including the Little Ice Age which ended in the nineteenth century and which appears to have been global in extent

The changes predicted to occur by about the middle of the next century due to increases in greenhouse gas concentrations from the Business-as-Usual emissions will make global mean temperatures higher than they have been in the last 150.000 years

The rate of change of global temperatures predicted for Business-as-Usual emissions will be greater than those

which have occured naturally on Earth over the last 10,000 years, and the rise in sea level will be about three to six times faster than that seen over the last 100 years or so

Has man already begun to change the global climate?

The instrumental record of surface temperature is fragmentary until the mid-nineteenth century, after which it slowly improves Because of different methods of measurement, historical records have to be harmonised with modem observations, introducing some uncertainty Despite these problems we believe that a real warming of the globe of 0 3°C - 0 6°C has taken place over the last century, any bias due to urbanisation is likely to be less than 0 05°C

Moreover since 1900 similar temperature increases are seen in three independent data sets one collected over land and two over the oceans Figure 11 shows current estimates of smoothed global-mean surface temperature over land and ocean since 1860 Confidence in the record has been increased by their similarity to recent satellite measurements of mid-tropospheric temperatures

YEAR

Figure 11: Global-mean combined land-air and sea-surface temperatures, 1861	1989, relative to the average for 1951-80

Although the overall temperature rise has been broadly similar in both hemispheres, it has not been steady, and differences in their rates of warming have sometimes persisted for decades Much of the warming since 1900 has been concentrated in two penods, the fust between about 1910 and 1940 and the othei since 1975 the five warmest years on tecord have all been in the 1980s The Northern Hemisphere cooled between the 1940s and the early 1970s when Southern Hemisphcic tempciatuies stayed nearly constant The pattern ot global warming since 1975 has been uneven with some legions mainly in the noithein hemisphere continuing to cool until iccentl} This iegional diversity indicates that 1 utuie iegional tcmpeiatuie changes are likely to differ consideiabl) from a global aveiage

The conclusion that global tcmpeiatuie has been using is stiongly supported by the leticat of most mountain glaciers of the woild since the end of the nineteenth centuiy and the fact that global sea level has nsen over the same penod by an aveiage of 1 to 2mm pei jeai Estimates of thermal expansion of the oceans and of increased melting of mountain glacieis and the ice margin in West Gieenland over the last centuiy show that the majot pait of the sea level rise appears to be ielated to the observed global warming This appaient connection between observed sea level rise and global wanning piovides grounds for believing that futuie warming will lead to an acceleration in sea level rise

The size of the warming ovei the last centuiy is bioadly consistent with the piedictions of climate models but is also of the same magnitude as natuial climate vailability II the sole cause of the observed wanning weie the human made giecnhouse effect, then the implied climate sensitivity would be neat the lowei end ol the iange lnlened horn the models The obscived inciease could be

largely due to natural variability, alternatively this variability and other man-made factors could have offset a still larger man-made greenhouse warming The unequivocal detection of the enhanced greenhouse effect from observations is not likely for a decade or more, when the committment to future climate change will then be considerably larger than it is today

Global-mean temperature alone is an inadequate indicator of greenhouse-gas-induced climatic change Identifying the causes of any global-mean temperatuie change inquires examination of other aspects of the changing climate, particulail} its spatial and temporal characteristics the man-made climate change signal Patterns of climate change from models such as the Northern Hemisphere warming fastci than the Southern Hennsphete and surface an watming faster over land than over oceans ate not apparent in observations to date However, we do not yet know what the detailed signal looks like because we have limited confidence in our predictions of climate change patterns Furthermoie, any changes to date could be masked by natural variability and other (possibly man made) factors, and we do not have a clear pictuie of these

How much will sea level rise ?

Simple models were used to calculate the rise in sea level to the year 2100, the results are illustrated below The calculations necessarily ignore any long-term changes unrelated to greenhouse forcing, that may be occurung but cannot be detected from the present data on land ice and the ocean The sea level rise expected fiom 1990-2100 undei the IPCC Business as-Usual emissions scenario is shown in Figure 12 An average late of global mean sea level use of

YEAR

Figure 12: Sea level rise predicted to result from Business-as-Usual emissions, showing the best-estimate and range

about 6cm per decade over the next century (with an uncertainty range of 3 - 10cm per decade) The predicted rise is about 20cm in global mean sea level by 2030, and 65cm by the end of the next century There will be significant regional variations

The best estimate in each case is made up mainly of positive contributions from thermal expansion of the oceans and the melting of glaciers Although, over the next 100 years, the effect of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets is expected to be small they make a major contribution to the uncertainty in predictions

Even if gieenhouse foicing increased no further, there would still be a commitment to a continuing sea level rise foi many decades and even centuries due to delays in climate ocean and ice mass lesponses As an illustration if the mcieases in greenhouse gas concentrations were to suddenly stop in 2030, sea level would go on using from 2030 to 2100 by as much again as liom 1990-2030, as shown in Figuie 13

Predicted sea level rises due to the other three emissions scenanos aie shown in Figure 14 with the Business-as-Usual case lot comparison only best-estimate calculations aie shown

The West Antarctic Ice Sheet is of special concern A laigc portion of it containing an amount oi ice equivalent to about 5nt ol global sea level, is grounded far below sea level There have been suggestions that a sudden outflow of ice might result ftom global warming and raise sea level quickl) and substantially Recent studies have shown that individual ice streams arc changing tapidly on a decade to centuiy time-scale however this is not necessanly related to climate change Within the next centuiy it is not likely

that there will be a major outflow of ice from West Antarctica due directly to global warming

Any rise m sea level is not expected to be uniform over the globe Thermal expansion, changes in ocean circulation, and surface air pressure will vary from region to region as the world warms, but in an as yet unknown way Such regional details await further development of more leahstic coupled ocean-atmosphere models In addition, vertical land movements can be as large or even larger than changes in global mean sea level these movements have to be taken into account when predicting local change in sea level lelative to land

The most severe effects of sea level rise are likely to result fiom extreme events (lot example, storm surges) the incidence of which may be aliected by climatic change

What will be the effect of climate change on ecosystems?

Ecosystem piocesscs such as photosynthesis and respiration arc dependent on climatic lactors and carbon dioxide concentration in the short term In the longer term, climate and carbon dioxide are among the factors which control ecosystem structure, i e , species composition, either directly by increasing mortality in poorly adapted species, or indirectly by mediating the competition between species Ecosystems will respond to local changes in temperature (including its rate of change), precipitation, soil moisture and extieme events Current models are unable to make tellable estimates oi changes in these parameters on the required local scales

YEAR

Figure 13: Commitment to sea level rise in the year 2030 The curve shows the sea level rise due to Business-as Usual emissions to 2030, with the additional rise that would occur in the remainder of the century even if climate forcing was stabilised in 2030

YEAR

ecosystems in a state ol maturity will be able to store more carbon in a warmer climate and at highei concentrations ol caibon dioxide We do not yet know if this is the case

The response to increased carbon dioxide results in greater efficiencies of water, light and nitrogen use These increased efficiencies may be particularly important during drought and in and/semi-and and infertile areas

Because species respond differently to climatic change some will increase in abundance and/or range while others will decrease Ecosystems will therefore change in structure and composition Some species may be displaced to higher latitudes and altitudes, and may be more prone to local and possibly even global extinction other species may thrive

As stated above ecosystem structure and species distribution are particulaily sensitive to the late of change of climate We can deduce something about how quickly global temperature has changed in the past liom palaeo climatological records As an example at the end of the last glaciation, within about a century, tempeiature increased by up to 5°C in the North Atlantic region, mainly in Western Europe Although during the increase from the glacial to the current interglacial temperature simple tundia ecosystems responded positively a similar rapid temperature mcieasc applied to more developed ecosystems could result in their instability

What should be done to reduce uncertainties, and how long will this take?

Although we can say that some climate change is unavoidable, much uncertainty exists in the prediction of global climate properties such as the temperature and rainfall Even greater uncertainty exists in predictions of regional climate change, and the subsequent consequences for sea level and ecosystems The key areas of scientific uncertainty are

Figure 14: Model estimates of sea level rise from 1990-2100 due to all four emissions scenarios

Photosynthesis captures atmospheric carbon dioxide, water and solar energy and stores them in organic compounds which arc then used for subsequent plant growth, the growth of animals or the growth of microbes tn the soil All of these organisms release carbon dioxide via respiration into the atmosphere Most land plants have a system of photosynthesis which will respond positively to increased atmospheric carbon dioxide (' the carbon dioxide fertilization effect') but the icsponse vanes with species The effect may decrease with time when rcstucted by othei ecological limitations, foi example nutrient availability It should be emphasized that the caibon content ol the terrestnal biospheie will inciease only if the foiest

•	clouds: primarily cloud formation dissipation and radiative properties which influence the response ol the atmosphere to gieenhouse forcing

•	oceans: the exchange of energy between the ocean and the atmosphere, between the upper layers of the ocean and the deep ocean, and transpoit within the ocean, all of which control the rate ol global climate change and the patterns of regional change,

•	greenhouse gases: quantification of the uptake and release of the greenhouse gases, their chemical reactions in the atmosphere, and how these may be influenced by climate change,

•	polar ice sheets: which affect predictions of sea level use

Studies of land surlace hydrology, and of impact on ecosystems aie also important

DEFORESTATION AND REFORESTATION

Man has been deforesting the Eaith foi millennia Until the early pait of the century, this was mainly in temperate legions moie recently it has been concentrated in the tiopics Deforestation has several potential impacts on climate through the carbon and nitrogen cycles (where it can lead to changes in atmosphenc caibon dioxide concent-lations) through the change in reflectivity of teriain when forests are cleared, through its effect on the hydrological cvcle (precipitation, evaporation and runoff) and surface roughness and thus atmospheric circulation which can produce remote effects on climate

It is estimated that each year about 2 Gt of carbon (GtC) is released to the atmosphere due to tropical deforestation The rate of forest clearing is difficult to estimate, probably until the mid-20th century, temperate deforestation and the loss of organic matter from soils was a more important contributor to atmospheric carbon dioxide than was the burning of fossil fuels Since then fossil fuels have become dominant one estimate is that around 1980, 1 6 GtC was being released annually from the clearing of tropical forests compared with about 5 GtC from the burning of fossil fuels If all the tropical lorests were removed the input is vanously estimated at from 150 to 240 GtC, this would increase atmospheric caibon dioxide by 35 to 60 ppmv

To analyse the effect of reforestation we assume that 10 million hectares of forests are planted each year for a period ol 40 years, i e , 4 million km1 would then have been planted by 2030 at which time 1 GtC would be absorbed annually until these forests teach maturity This would happen in 40-100 yeais for most loicsts The above scenario implies an accumulated uptake of about 20 GtC by the yeai 2030 and up to 80 GtC after 100 years This accumulation of carbon in forests is equivalent to some 5-10% of the emission due to fossil fuel burning in the Business-as Usual scenario

Deforestation can also alter climate directly by increasing leflectiv lty and decreasing evapotranspiration Experiments with climate models predict that replacing all the forests of the Amazon Basin by grassland would reduce the rainfall over the basin by about 20% and increase mean temperature by several degrees

To leduce the current scientific uncertainties in each of these areas will require internationally coordinated reseaich, the goal of which is to improve our capability to observe, model and understand the global climate system Such a program of research will reduce the scientific uncertainties and assist in the formulation of sound national and international response strategies

Systematic long term observations of the system are of vital importance for understanding the natural variability of the Eaith s climate system detecting whether mans activities are changing it parameterising key processes for models and verifying model simulations Increased accuiacy and coverage in many observations are lequired Associated with expanded observations is the need to develop appropnate comprehensive global information bases lor the rapid and efficient dissemination and utilization of data The main observational requirements are i)

i) the maintenance and improvement of observations (such as those from satellites) provided by the World Weather Watch Programme of WMO

n) the maintenance and enhancement of a programme of monitoring, both from satellite-based and surfacebased instruments of key climate elements foi which accuiate observations on a continuous basis aie required such as the distnbution of impoitant atmospheric constituents clouds the Eaith s ladiation

budget, precipitation, winds, sea surface temperatures and terrestrial ecosystem extent, type and productivity

m) the establishment of a global ocean observing system to measure changes in such variables as ocean surface topography, circulation, transport of heat and chemicals, and sea-ice extent and thickness

iv)	the development of major new systems to obtain data on the oceans, atmosphere and terrestrial ecosystems using both satellite-based instruments and instruments based on the surface, on automated instrumented vehicles in the ocean, on floating and deep sea buoys, and on ancralt and balloons

v)	the use of palaeo climatological and historical mst rumentai records to document natural variability and changes in the climate system, and subsequent environmental response

The modelling ol climate change requires the development of global models which couple together atmospheie land, ocean and ice models and which incorporate more realistic formulations of the ielevant piocesses and the mteiactions between the different components Processes in the biosphere (both on land and in the ocean) also need to be included Highei spatial lesolution than is cunently generally used is lequned if iegional patterns aie to be predicted These models will lcqune the hugest computeis which aie planned to be available during the next decades

Understanding of the climate system will be developed from analyses of observations and of the results from model simulations In addition, detailed studies of particular processes will be lequircd through targetted observational campaigns Examples of such field campaigns include combined observational and small-scale modelling studies for different legions, of the formation, dissipation, radiative, dynamical and microphysical properties of clouds, and ground-based (ocean and land) and aircraft measurements of the fluxes of greenhouse gases from specific ecosystems In paiticular, emphasis must be placed on field experiments that will assist in the development and improvement of sub grid-scale parametrizations for models

The required program of research will require unprecedented international cooperation, with the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) of the World Meteorological Organization and International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and the International GeosphereBiosphere Programme (IGBP) of ICSU both playing vital roles These are large and complex endeavours that will require the involvement of all nations particularly the developing countries Implementation of existing and planned projects will require increased financial and human resources, the latter requirement has immediate implications at all levels of education, and the international community of scientists needs to be widened to include more members from developing countries

The WCRP and IGBP have a number of ongoing or planned research programmes, that address each of the three key areas of scientific uncertainty Examples include

•	clouds

International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP),

Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX)

•	oceans

World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), Tropical Oceans and Global Atmosphere (TOGA)

•	trace gases

Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS), International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC), Past Global Changes (PAGES)

As research advances, increased understanding and improved observations will lead to progressively more reliable climate predictions However considering the complex nature of the problem and the scale of the scientific programmes to be undertaken we know that rapid results cannot be expected Indeed fuither scientific advances may expose unforeseen problems and areas of ignoiancc

Time-scales for narrowing the uncertainties will be dictated by progress over the next 10-15 years in two mam areas

•	Use of the fastest possible computers, to take into account coupling of the atmosphere and the oceans in models, and to provide sufficient resolution for regional predictions

•	Development of improved representation of smallscale processes within climate models, as a result of the analysis of data from observational programmes to be conducted on a continuing basis well into the next century

Annex

EMISSIONS SCENARIOS FROM WORKING GROUP III OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

The Steering Group of the Response Strategics Working Group requested the USA and the Netherlands to develop emissions scenarios for evaluation by the IPCC Working Group I The scenarios cover the emissions of carbon dioxide (COs) methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), carbon monoxide (CO) and nitrogen oxides (NOX) from the present up to the year 2100 Growth of the economy and population was taken common tor all scenarios Population was assumed to approach 10 5 billion in the second hall oi the next century Economic growth was assumed to be 2-V/i annually in the coming decade in the OECD countries and 3 5% in the Eastern European and developing countries The economic growth levels were assumed to decicase thereafter In order to reach the required targets, levels of technological development and environmental controls were varied

In the Business-as-Usual scenario (Scenario A) the energv supply is coal intensive and on the demand side only modest efficiency increases are achieved Carbon monoxide controls are modest, deforestation continues until the tropical forests are depleted and agricultural emissions of methane and nitrous oxide are uncontrolled For CFCs

the Montreal Protocol is implemented albeit with only partial participation Note that the aggregation of national projections by IPCC Working Group III gives higher emissions (10	20%) of carbon dioxide and methane by

2025

In Scenario B the energy supply mix shifts towards lower carbon fuels, notably natural gas Large efficiency increases are achieved Carbon monoxide controls are stringent, deforestation is reversed and the Montreal Protocol implemented with lull paiticipation

In Scenario C a shift towards renewables and nuclear energy takes place in the second half of next century CFCs are now phased out and agricultural emissions limited

For Scenario D a shiit to renewables and nuclear in the first half ol the next century reduces the emissions of carbon dioxide, initially more or less stabilizing emissions in the industrialized countries The scenario shows that stringent controls in industrialized countries combined with moderated growth of emissions in developing countries could stabilize atmospheric concentrations Carbon dioxide emissions are reduced to 50% of 1985 levels by the middle of the next century

M in made emissions of carbon dioxide and methane (as examples) to the year 2100 in the four scenarios developed by IPCC Working

Group III

Introduction

Purpose of the Report

The purpose of this report is to provide a scientific assessment of:

1.	the factors which may affect climate change during the next century, especially those which are due to human activity;

2.	the responses of the atmosphere-ocean-land-ice system to those factors;

3.	the current ability to model global and regional climate changes and their predictability;

4.	the past climate record and presently observed climate anomalies.

On the basis of this assessment, the report presents current knowledge regarding predictions of climate change

(including sea-level rise and the effect on ecosystems) over the next century, the timing of changes together with an assessment of the uncertainties associated with these predictions.

This introduction provides some of the basic scientific ideas concerned with climate change, and gives an outline of the structure of the report.

The Climate System

A simple definition of climate is the average weather. A description of the climate over a period (which may typically be from a few years to a few centuries) involves the averages of appropriate components of the weather over that period, together with the statistical variations of those components.

Changes of solar radiation

Schematic illustration of the climate system components and interactions, (from Houghton, J.T. (ed), 1984: The Global Climate; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 233pp)

Fluctuations of climate occur on many scales as a result of natural processes; this is often referred to as natural climate variability. The climate change which we are addressing in this report is that which may occur over the next century as a result of human activities. More complete definitions of these terms can be found in WMO (1979) and WMO (1984).

The climate variables which are commonly used are concerned mainly with the atmosphere. But, in considering the climate system we cannot look at the atmosphere alone. Processes in the atmosphere are strongly coupled to the land surface, to the oceans and to those parts of the Earth covered with ice (known as the cryosphere). There is also strong coupling to the biosphere (the vegetation and other living systems on the land and in the ocean). These five components (atmosphere, land, ocean, ice and biosphere) together form the climate system.

Forcing of the Climate System

The driving force for weather and climate is energy from the Sun. The atmosphere and surface of the Earth intercept solar radiation (in the short-wave, including visible, part of the spectrum); about a third of it is reflected, the rest is absorbed. The energy absorbed from solar radiation must be balanced by outgoing radiation from the Earth (terrestrial radiation); this is in the form of long-wave invisible infra-red energy. As the amount of outgoing terrestrial radiation is determined by the temperature of the Earth, this temperature will adjust until there is a balance between incoming and outgoing radiation.

There are several important factors (known as climate forcing agents) which can change the balance between the energy (in the form of solar radiation) absorbed by the Earth and that emitted by it in the form of long-wave infrared radiation - the radiative forcing on climate. The most obvious of these is a change in the amount or seasonal distribution of solar radiation which reaches the Earth (orbital changes were probably responsible for initiating the ice ages). Any change in the albedo (reflectivity) of the land, due to desertification or deforestation will also affect the amount of solar energy absorbed, as will absorption of solar radiation (and outgoing long-wave radiation) by aerosols in the lower atmosphere (where they can be man-made) or the upper atmosphere (where they are predominantly natural, originating mainly from volcanoes).

The Greenhouse Effect

Apart from solar radiation itself, the most important radiative forcing arises from the greenhouse effect.

Short-wave solar radiation can pass through the clear atmosphere relatively unimpeded, but long-wave terrestrial

SUN

Some of the infrared radiation is absorbed by the greenhouse gases. The effect is to warm the surface and the lower atmosphere

EARTH

Most solar radiation passes Infrared radiation through the clear atmosphere, is emitted from the is absorbed by the Earth's Earth's surface surface, and warms it

A simplified diagram illustrating the greenhouse effect

radiation emitted by the warm surface of the Earth is partially absorbed and then re-emitted out to space by a number of trace gases in the cooler atmosphere above. This process adds lo the net energy input to the lower atmosphere and the underlying surface thereby increasing their temperature. This is the basic greenhouse effect; the trace gases are often thought of as acting in a way somewhat analogous to the glass in a greenhouse. The main greenhouse gases are not the major constituents, nitrogen and oxygen, but water vapour (the biggest contributor), carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and (in recent years) chlorofluorocarbons.

How do we Know that the Greenhouse Effect is Real?

We know that the greenhouse effect works in practice, for several reasons. Firstly, the mean temperature of the Earth's surface is already 32°C warmer than it would be if the natural greenhouse gases (mainly carbon dioxide and water vapour) were not present. Satellite measurements of the radiation emitted from the Earth's surface and atmosphere demonstrate the absorption due to the greenhouse gases.

Secondly, we know that the composition of the atmospheres of Venus, Earth and Mars are very different, and their surface temperatures (shown in the table below) are in good agreement with those calculated on the basis of greenhouse effect theory.

Thirdly, measurements from ice cores, dating back 160,000 years, show that the Earth’s temperature was closely related to the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The ice core record shows that the

	Surface Pressure (Relative to Earth)	Mam  Greenhouse  Gases	Surface temperature in absence of Greenhouse effect	Observed Surface  Temperature	Warming due to Greenhouse Effect
VENUS	90	> 90% CO2	46°C	477°C	523°C
EARTH	1	~0 04% CO2  ~1% H2O	-18°C	15°C	33°C
MARS	0 007	> 80% CO2	-57°C	-47°C	10°C

atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide were much lower during the ice ages than during interglacial periods It is likely that changes in greenhouse gas concentrations contributed, in part, to the large (4 -5°C) temperature swings between ice ages and interglacial periods

The Enhanced Greenhouse Effect

An increase in concentrations of greenhouse gases is expected to raise the global-mean surface-air temperature which, for simplicity, is usually relerred to as the global temperature' Strictly this is an enliani ed greenhouse effect - above that occurring due to natural greenhouse gas concentrations The word enhanced is frequently omitted, but should not be forgotten in this context

Changes in the Abundances of the Greenhouse Gases

We know, with certainly, that the concentrations of naturally occurring greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have varied on palaeo time-scales For a thousand years prior to the industrial ievolution the abundances of these gases were relatively constant However as the world s population increased, emissions of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, methane, chlorofluorocarbons, nitrous oxide, and tropospheric ozone have increased substantially due to industrialisation and changes in agriculture and landuse Carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide all have significant natural and man-made sources, while the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are recent man-made gases Section 1 of the report summauscs our knowledge ot the various greenhouse gases, then sources, sinks and lifetimes, and their likely rate of mciease

Relative Importance of Greenhouse Gases

So far as radiative forcing of the climate is concerned, the increase in carbon dioxide has been the most important (contributing about 60% of the increased forcing over the last 200 years), methane is of next importance contributing about 20%, chloroflourocarbons contribute about 10% and all the other gases the remaining 10% Section 2 of the report reviews the contributions of the different gases to radiative forcing in more detail

Feedbacks

If everything else in the climate system remained the same following an increase in greenhouse gases, it would be relatively easy to calculate, from a knowledge of their radiative properties, what the increase in average global temperature would be However, as the components of the system begin to warm, other factors come into play which are called feedbacks These factors can act to amplify the initial wanning (positive feedbacks) oi reduce it (negative feedbacks) Negative feedbacks can reduce the warming but cannot produce a global cooling The simplest ol these leedbacks arises because as the atmosphere warms the amount oi waler vapoui it holds increases Watci vapoui is an important gicenhouse gas and will thereloie amplify the warming Other feedbacks occur through interactions with snow and sea-ice, with clouds and with the biosphere Section 3 explores these more fully

The Role of the Oceans

The oceans play a central role in shaping the climate thiough thice distinct mechanisms Firstly they absorb carbon dioxide and exchange it with the atmosphere (Section 1 addresses this aspect of the carbon cycle) Secondly, they exchange heat water vapour and

\ m in

Inti oduition

momentum with the atmosphere Wind stress at the sea surface drives the large-scale ocean circulation Watei vapour, evaporated from the ocean surface, is transported by the atmospheric circulation and provides latent heat energy to the atmosphere The ocean circulations in their turn redistribute heat, tresh water and dissolved chemicals around the globe Thirdly, they sequester heat, absorbed at the surface, in the deepest regions for periods of a thousand years or more through vertical circulation and convective mixing

Therelore, any study of the climate and how it might change must include a detailed description of processes in the ocean together with the coupling between the ocean and the atmosphere A description of ocean processes is presented in Section 3 and the results from ocean atmospheie coupled models appear in Section 6

Climate Forecasting

To carry out a climate forecast it is necessary to take into account all the complex interactions and feedbacks between the different components of the climate system This is done through the use of a numerical model which as far as possible includes a description of all the processes and interactions Such a model is a more elaborate version of the global models currently employed for weather forecasting

Global forecasting models concentrate on the circulation of the atmosphere (for that reason they are often called atmospheric general circulation models (or atmospheric GCMs) They are based on equations describing the atmosphere s basic dynamics, and include descriptions in simple physical terms (called parameterizations) of the physical processes Forecasts are made for several days ahead from an analysis derived from weather observations Such forecasts are called deterministic weather forecasts because the) describe the detailed weather to be expected at any place and time on the synoptic scale (of the order of a few hundred kilometres) They cannot of course, be deterministic so far as small scale phenomena, such as individual showei clouds are concerned

The most elaborate climate model employed at the present time consists of an atmospheric GCM coupled to an ocean GCM which describes the structure and dynamics of the ocean Added to this coupled model are appropriate descriptions although necessarily somewhat crude, of the other components of the climate system (namely, the land sut face and the ice) and the mteiactions between them If the model is run for scveial >ears with parameters and forcing appiopriate to the curient climate the models output should beai a close resemblance to the observed climate It parameters rcpiescnting say increasing gieenhouse gases are introduced into the model it can be used to simulate or pi edict the resulting climate change

To run models such as these requires very large computer resources indeed However, simplified models are also employed to explore the various sensitivities of the climate system and to make simulations of the time evolution of climate change In particular, simplifications of the ocean structure and dynamics are included, details are given in Section 3 Section 4 describes how well the various models simulate current climate and also how well they have been able to make reconstructions of past climates

Equilibrium and Time-Dependent Response

The simplest way of employing a climate model to determine the response to a change in forcing due to increases in greenhouse gases is to first run the model for several years with the current forcing, then to change the forcing (for instance by doubling the concentration of carbon dioxide in the appropriate part of the model) and run the model again Comparing the two model climates will then provide a forecast of the change in climate to be expected under the new conditions Such a forecast will be of the equilibrium response, it is the response expected to that change when the whole climate system has reached a steady state Most climate forecasting models to date have been run in this equilibrium response mode Section 5 summarises the results obtained from such models

A more complicated and difficult calculation can be carried out by changing the forcing in the model slowly on the appropriate natural time-scale Again, comparison with the unperturbed model climate is carried out to obtain the time-dependent response of the model to climate change

These time-dependent models, results from which are presented in Section 6, are the ones which describe the climate system most realistically However, rather few of them have been run so far Comparison of the magnitude and patterns of climate change as predicted by these models has been made with results from models run in the equilibrium response mode The results of this comparison provide guidance on how to interpret some of the more detailed results from the equilibrium model runs

Detection of Climate Change

Of central importance to the study of climate and climate change are observations of climate From the distant past we have palaeo-chmatic data which provide information on the response of the climate system to different historical lorcings Section 4 describes how climate models can be validated in these differing climate regimes It is only within about the last hundred years, however, that accurate observations with good global coverage exist Even so, there have been numerous changes in instruments and observational practices during this period, and quite

sophisticated numerical corrections are required to standardize the data to a self consistent record

Section 7 discusses these issues and provides evidence, from land and sea temperature records and glacier measurements, that a small global warming has occurred since the late nineteenth century The temperature and precipitation records are examined regionally as well, and recent data on sea-ice and snow cover are shown

Within these time-series of data we can examine the natural variability of climate and search for a possible climate change signal due to increasing greenhouse gases Section 8 compares the expectations from model predictions with the observed change in climate At a global level the change is consistent with predictions from models but there may be other effects producing it Problems arise at a regional level because there are differences between the various predictions and because the changes observed so far are small and comparable to spatial and temporal noise In this Section, however, an estimate is made of the likely time-scale for detection of the enhanced greenhouse effect

Changes in Sea Level

An important consequence of a rise in global temperature would be an increase in sea level Section 9 assesses the contribution from thermal expansion of the oceans, melting of mountain glaciers and changes to the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets under the four IPCC Scenarios of future temperature rise Measurements of sea level from tide gauges around the world date back a hundred years and provide evidence for a small increase which appears to be fairly steady The stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, which has sometimes been invoked as a possible mechanism for large sea level rise in the future, is examined

Climate Change and Ecosystems

Ecosystems (both land and marine based plant-life) will respond to climate change and through feedback processes, influence it Section 10 looks at the direct effect of climate change on crops forests and tundra Plant growth and metabolism are functions of temperature and soil moisture, as well as carbon dioxide itself, changes tn the activity of ecosystems will therefore modify the carbon cycle Plant species have migrated in the past, but their ability to adapt in future may be limited by the presence of artificial barriers caused by human activities and by the speed of climate change This Section also looks at the effects of deforestation and reforestation on the global carbon budget

Improving our Predictions

Despite our confidence in the general predictions from numerical models, there will be uncertainties in the detailed timing and patterns of climate change due to the enhanced greenhouse effect for some time to come Section 11 lists the many programs which are already underway or are planned to narrow these uncertainties These cover the full range of Earth and Space based observing systems, process studies to unravel the details of feedbacks between the many components of the climate system and expected developments in computer models

The Climate Implications of Emission Controls

In order that any policy decisions on emission controls are soundly based it is useful to quantify the climate benefits of different levels of controls on different time-scales The Annex to this Report shows the full pathway of emissions to temperature change and sea-level rise for the four IPCC Policy Scenarios plus four other Science Scenarios The Policy Scenarios were derived by IPCC Working Group III and assume progressively more stringent levels of emission controls The Science Scenarios were chosen artificially to illustrate the effects of sooner, rather than later, emission controls, and to show the changes in temperature and sea level which we may be committed to as a result of past emissions of greenhouse gases

References

WMO (1979) Proceedings of the World Climate Conference, Geneva, 12-23 February 1979 WMO 537

WMO (1984) Scientific Plan for the World Climate Research Program WCRP Pub series No 2, WMO/TD No 6

1

Greenhouse Gases and Aerosols

R.T. WATSON, H. RODHE, H. OESCHGER, U. SIEGENTHALER

Contributors:

M. Andreae; R. Charlson; R. Cicerone; J. Coakley; R. Derwent; J. Elkins;

F.	Fehsenfeld; P. Fraser; R. Gammon; H. Grassl; R. Harriss; M. Heimann;

R.	Houghton; V. Kirchhoff; G. Kohlmaier; S. Lal; P. Liss; J. Logan; R. Luxmoore;

L. Merlivat; K. Minami; G. Pearman; S. Penkett; D. Raynaud; E. Sanhueza; P. Simon; W. Su; B. Svensson; A. Thompson; P. Vitousek; A. Watson; M. Whitfield; P. Winkler;

S.	Wofsy.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary	5	1 3.1 3 Isotopic composition of methane  1 3 2 Sinks of Methane	19  19
1.1 Introduction	7	1 3 3 Sources of Methane	20
		13 3 1 Natural wetlands	20
1.2 Carbon Dioxide	8	1 3 3 2 Rice paddies	20
1 2 1 The Cycle of Carbon in Nature	8	1 3 3 3 Biomass burning	21
12 11 The role of the atmosphere	9	1 3 3 4 Enteric fermentation (animals)	21
12 12 The role of the ocean	9	1 3 3 5 Termites	21
12 13 The role of terrestrial vegetation and soils	10	1 3 3 6 Landfills	21
1 2 2 Anthropogenic Perturbations	10	1 3 3 7 Oceans and freshwaters	21
12 2 1 Historical fossil fuel input	10	1 3 3 8 Coal mining	21
1 2 2 2 Historical land use changes	10	1 3 3 9 Gas drilling, venting and transmission	21
1 2 3 Long-Term Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Variations	11	1 3 4 Feedbacks from Climate Change into the	
1 2 4 The Contemporary Record of Carbon Dioxide -		Methane Cycle	21
Observations and Interpretation	11	13 4 1 Tropical methane sources	22
12 4 1 The carbon dioxide increase from pre industrial		1 3 4 2 High latitude methane sources	22
period	11	1 3 5 Conclusions	22
1 2 4 2 Uptake by the ocean	12		
1 2 4 3 Redistribution of anthropogenic carbon dioxide	13	1.4 Halocarbons	23
1 2 4 4 Seasonal variations	14	1 4 1 Atmospheric Distribution of Halocarbons	23
1 2 4 5 Interannual variations	14	1 4 2 Sinks for Halocarbons	24
1 2 4 6 Temporal variations of carbon isotopes	14	1 4 3 Sources of Halocarbons	24
1 2 5 Evidence that the Contemporary Carbon Dioxide		1 4 4 Future Atmospheric Concentration of Halocarbons	24
Increase is Anthropogenic	14	1 4 5 Conclusions	24
1 2 6 Sensitivity Analyses for Future Carbon Dioxide			
Concentrations	14	1.5 Nitrous Oxide	25
1 2 7 Feedbacks from Climate Change into the Carbon		1 5 1 Atmospheric Distribution of Nitrous Oxide	25
Dioxide Cycle	15	1 5 2 Sinks for Nitrous Oxide	25
12 7 1 Oceanic feedback effects	16	1 5 3 Sources of Nitrous Oxide	25
12 7 11 Ocean temperature	16	15 3 1 Oceans	25
12 7 12 Ocean circulation	16	1 5 3 2 Soils	26
12 7 13 Gas exchange rates	16	1 5 3 3 Combustion	26
12 7 14 Modification of oceanic biogeochemical		1 5 3 4 Biomass burning	26
cycling	16	1 5 3 5 Fertilizer / ground water	27
12 7 15 UV-B radiation	16	1 5 4 Conclusions	27
1 2 7 2 Terrestrial biospheric feedbacks	16		
1 2 7 2 1 Carbon dioxide fertilization	16	1.6 Stratospheric Ozone	27
1 2 7 2 2 Eutrophication and toxification	16	1 6 1 Straosphenc Ozone Trends	27
1 2 7 2 3 Temperature	17	16 11 Total column ozone trends	27
1 2 7 2 4 Water	17	16 12 Changes in the vertical distribution of ozone	28
1 2 7 2 5 Change in geographical distribution of		1 6 2 Future Changes	28
vegetation types	17		
1 2 7 2 6 UV-B radiation	17	1.7 Tropospheric Ozone and Related Trace Gases	
2 8 Conclusions	17	(Carbon Monoxide, Non-Methane Hydrocarbons, and Reactive Nitrogen Oxides)	28
1.3 Methane	18	1 7 1 Tropospheric Ozone	28
1 3 1 Atmospheric Distribution of Methane	18	17 11 Atmospheric distribution	28
13 11 Palaeo atmospheric record of methane	18	17 12 Trends	29
13 12 Contemporary record of methane	19	17 13 Relationships between ozone and its precursors	29

1.7.2	Carbon Monoxide	30

1.7.2.1	Atmospheric distribution of carbon monoxide 30

1.7.2.2	Sources and sinks for carbon monoxide	30

1.7.3	Reactive Nitrogen Oxides	30

1.7.3.1	Atmospheric distribution of nitrogen oxides 30

1.7.3.2	Sources and sinks of nitrogen oxides	30

1.7.4	Non-Methane Hydrocarbons	31

1.7.4.1	Atmospheric distribution of non-methane

hydrocarbons	31

1.7.4.2	Sources and sinks for non-methane

hydrocarbons	31

1.7.5	Feedbacks Between Climate and the Methane /

Non-Methane Hydrocarbon / Carbon Monoxide /

Oxides of Nitrogen I Tropospheric Ozone System 31

1.7.6	Conclusions	31

1.8	Aerosol Particles	31

1.8.1	Concentrations and Trends of Aerosol Particles

in the Troposphere	31

1.8.2	The Atmospheric Sulphur Budget	32

1.8.3	Aerosol Particles in the Stratosphere	33

1.8.4	Conclusions	33

References	34

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Earth’s climate is dependent upon the radiative balance of the atmosphere, which in turn depends upon the input of solar radiation and the atmospheric abundances ot ladiatively active trace gases (1 e , greenhouse gases), clouds and aerosols

Since the industrial revolution the atmospheric concentrations of several greenhouse gases, i e , carbon dioxide (CO2) methane (CH4), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), nitrous oxide (N2O), and tropospheric ozone (O3), have been increasing primarily due to human activities Several ol these gieenhouse gases have long atmospheric lifetimes, decades to centuries, which means that their atmospheric concentrations respond slowly to changes in emission rates In addition theie is evidence that the concentrations of troposphenc aerosols have increased at least regionally

Carbon Dioxide

The atmospheric CO2 concentration at 353 ppms in 1990 is now about 25% greater than the pre industiial (1750 1800) value of about 280 ppmv, and higher than at any time in at least the last 160,000 years Carbon dioxide is currently rising at about 1 8 ppmv (0 5%) per year due to anthropogenic emissions Anthropogenic emissions ol COo are estimated to be 5 7±0 5 Gt C (tn 1987) due to fossil fuel burning, plus 0 6	2 5 Gt C (in

1980) due to deforestation The atmospheric inciease during the past decade corresponds to (48±8)% of the total emissions during the same period with the remaindci being taken up by the oceans and land Indirect evidence suggests that the land and oceans sequester CO2 in roughly equal pioportions though the mechanisms are not all well undetstood The time taken lor atmospheric CO2 to adjust to changes in sources 01 sinks is ot order 50 200 years, determined mainly by the slow exchange of carbon between surface watcis and dcepet layeis of the ocean Consequently CO2 emitted into the atmosphere today will influence the atmospheric concentiation of CO2 for centuries into the future Three models have been used to estimate that even if anthropogenic emissions of CO2 could be kept constant at present day rates, atmospheric CO2 would increase to 415 - 480 ppmv by the year 2050, and to 460 - 560 ppmv by the year 2100 In order to stabilize concentrations at present day levels an immediate reduction in global anthropogenic emissions by 60 80 percent would be necessary

Methane

Current atmospheric CH4 concentration, at 1 72 ppm\ is now more than double the pre-industrial (1750 1800) value ot about

0 8 ppmv, and is increasing at a rate of about 0 015 ppmv (0 9%) per year The major sink for CH4, reaction with hydroxyl (OH) radicals in the troposphere, results in a relatively short atmospheric lifetime of about 10 years Human activities such as rice cultivation, domestic ruminant rearing, biomass burning, coal mining, and natural gas venting have increased the input of CH4 into the atmosphere, which combined with a possible decrease in the concentration of tropospheric OH yields the observed rise in global CH4 However the quantitative importance of each of the factors contributing to the observed increase is not well known at present In order to stabilize concentrations at present day levels an immediate reduction in global anthropogenic emissions by 15 20 percent would be necessary

Chlorofluorocarbons

The current atmospheric concentrations of the anthropogenically produced halocarbons CCI3F (CFC 11) CCI2F2 (CFC 12) C2CI3F3 (CFC 113) and CCI4 (carbon tetrachloride) are about 280 pptv 484 pptv 60 pptv and 146 pptv respectively Over the past few decades their concentrations, except for CCI4 have increased more rapidly (on a percentage basis) than the other gieenhouse gases, currently at rates of at least 4% per year The fully halogenated CFCs and CCI4 are primarily removed by photolysis in the stratosphere, and have atmospheric lifetimes in excess of 50 years Future emissions will, most likely, be eliminated or significantly lower than todays because of current international negotiations to strengthen regulations on chlorofluorocarbons However, the atmospheric concentrations ot CFCs 11 12 and 113 will still be significant (30 - 40% ot current) lor at least the next centuiy because of their long atmospheiic lifetimes

Nitrous Oxide

The current atmospheric N2O concentration, at 310 ppbv, is now about 8% greater than in the pre-industrial era, and is inctcasing at a rate of about 0 8 ppbv (0 25%) per year The major sink foi N2O, photolysis in the stratosphere, results in a relatively long atmospheric lifetime of about 150 years It is difficult to quantitatively account tor the source of the current increase in the atmospheric concentiation of N2O but it is thought to be due to human activities Recent data suggest that the total annual flux of N2O from combustion and biomass burning is much less than picviously believed Agricultural practices may stimulate emissions of N2O from soils and play a major role In order to stabi1 ize concentrations at present day levels an immediate

reduction ot 70	80% of the additional flux of N2O that has

occurred since the pre industrial era would be necessary

Ozone

O/one is an effective greenhouse gas especially in the middle and upper troposphere and lower stratosphere Its concentration in the troposphere is highly variable because of its short lifetime It is photochemically produced m-situ through a series of complex reactions involving carbon monoxide (CO), CH4, non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHC), and nitrogen oxide radicals (NOxj, and also transported downward from the stratosphere The limited observational data support positive trends of about 1% per year for O3 below 8 km in the northern hemisphere (consistent with positive trends in several of the precursor gases, especially NOX, CH4 and CO) but probably close to zero trend in the southern hemisphere There is also evidence that O3 has decreased by a few percent globally in the lower stratosphere (below 25 km) within the last decade Unfortunately, there are no reliable longterm data near the tropopause

Aerosol particles

Aerosol particles have a lifetime ot at most a few weeks in the troposphere and occur in highly variable concentrations A large proportion of the particles that influence cloud processes and the radiative balance is derived from gaseous sulphur emissions Due to fossil fuel combustion, these emissions have more than doubled globally, causing a large increase in the concentration of aerosol sulphate especially over and around the industrialized regions of Europe and North America Future concentrations of aerosol sulphate will vary in proportion to changes in anthropogenic emissions Aerosol particles derived from natural (biological) emissions may contribute to climate feedback processes During a few years following major volcanic eruptions the concentrations of natural aerosol particles in the stratosphere can be greatly enhanced

1.1	Introduction

The Earth s climate is dependent upon the radiative balance ot the atmosphere, which in turn depends upon the input of solar radiation and the atmospheric abundances of radiatively active trace gases (1 e , greenhouse gases), clouds and aerosols Consequently, it is essential to gain an understanding of how each of these climate forcing agents varies naturally, and how some of them might be influenced by human activities

The chemical composition of the Earth s atmosphere is changing, largely due to human activities (Table 1 1) Air trapped in Antarctic and Greenland ice shows that there have been major increases in the concentrations of radiatively active gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O) since the beginning of the industrial revolution In addition industrially-produced chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are now present in the atmosphere in significant concentrations, and there is evidence that the concentrations of tropospheric O3 and aerosols have increased at least regionally

Atmospheric measurements indicate that in many cases the rates of change have increased in recent decades Many ol the greenhouse gases have long atmospheric life-times, decades to centuries, which implies that their atmospheric concentrations respond slowly to changes in emission rates

The effectiveness of a greenhouse gas in influencing the Earth s radiative budget is dependent upon its atmospheric concentration and its ability to absorb outgoing long-wave terrestrial radiation Tropospheric water vapour is the single most important greenhouse gas, but its atmospheric concentration is not significantly influenced by direct anthropogenic emissions Of the greenhouse gases that are directly alfected by human activities, CO2 has the largest radiative effect, followed by the CFCs, CH4, tropospheric O3, and N2O Although the present rate of increase in the atmospheric concentration of CO2 is about a factor of 70,000 times greater than that of CCI3F (CFC-11) and CCI2F2 (CFC-12) combined, and a factor of about 120 times greater than that of CH4, its contribution to changes in the radiative forcing during the decade of the 1980s was

Table 1.1 Summaiy of Key Gi eenhouse Gases Influenced by Human Activities I

Parameter	CO2	CH4	CFC-11	CFC-12	n2o
Pre-industnal atmospheric concentration (1750-1800)	280 ppmv2	0 8 ppmv	0	0	288 ppbv2
Current atmospheric concentration  (1990)3	353 ppmv	1 72 ppmv	280 pptv2	484 pptv	310 ppbv
Current rate of annual atmospheric accumulation	1 8 ppmv  (0 5%)	0 015 ppmv  (0 9%)	9 5 pptv  (4%)	17 pptv  (4%)	0 8 ppbv (0 25%)
Atmospheric lifetime^ (years)	(50 200)	10	65	130	150

1	Ozone has not been included in the table because of lack of precise data

2	ppmv = parts per million by volume, ppbv = parts per billion by volume,

pptv = parts per trillion by volume

3	The current (1990) concentrations have been estimated based upon an extrapolation of measurements reported for earlier years, assuming that the recent trends remained approximately constant

4	For each gas in the table, except CO2 the lifetime is defined here as the ratio of the atmospheric content to the total rate of removal This time scale also chaiactcn/es the rate of adjustment of the atmospheric concentrations if the emission rates are changed abruptly CCA is a special case since it has no real sinks but is merely circulated between various reservoirs (atmosphere ocean biota) The lifetime of CCA given in the table is a rough indication of the time it would take for the CCA concentiation to adjust to changes in the emissions (see section 1 2 1 for further details)

about 55%, compared to 17% for CFCs (11 and 12), and 15% for CH4 (see Section 2) Other CFCs and N2O accounted for about 8%, and 5%, respectively, of the changes in the radiative forcing While the contribution from tropospheric O3 may be important, it has not been quantified because the observational data is inadequate to determine its trend This pattern arises because of differences in the efficiencies of the gases to absorb terrestrial radiation

Aerosol particles play an important role in the climate system because of their direct interaction (absorption and scattering) with solar and terrestrial radiation, as well as through their influence on cloud processes and thereby, indirectly, on radiative fluxes

There is a clear need to document the historical record of the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, as well as to understand the physical, chemical, geological, biological and social processes responsible for the observed changes A quantitative understanding of the atmospheric concentrations of these gases requires knowledge of the cycling and distribution of carbon, nitrogen and other key nutrients within and between the atmosphere, terrestrial ecosystems, oceans and sediments, and the influence of human actions on these cycles Without knowledge of the processes responsible for the observed past and present changes in the atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols it will not be possible to predict with confidence future changes in atmospheric composition, nor therefore the resulting changes in the radiative forcing of the atmosphere

1.2	Carbon Dioxide

1.2.1	The Cycle of Carbon in Nature

Carbon in the form of CO2, carbonates, organic compounds, etc is cycled between various reservoirs, atmosphere, oceans, land biota and marine biota, and, on geological time scales, also sediments and rocks (Figure 1 1, for more detailed reviews see Sundquist, 1985 Bolin, 1981. 1986, Trabalka, 1985, Siegenthaler, 1986) The largest natural exchange fluxes occur between the atmosphere and the terrestrial biota and between the atmosphere and the surface water of the oceans By comparison, the net inputs into the atmosphere from fossil fuel combustion and deforestation are much smaller, but are large enough to modify the natural balance

The turnover time of CO2 in the atmosphere, measured as the ratio of the content to the fluxes through it, is about 4 years This means that on average it takes only a few years before a CO2 molecule in the atmosphere is taken up by plants or dissolved in the ocean This short time scale must not be confused with the time it takes tor the atmospheric CO2 level to adjust to a new equilibrium if sources or sinks change This adjustment time, corresponding to the lifetime

Deforestat on

Atmosphere 750 + 3/year

2

50

92

50

▲

90

5

102

Fossil Fuel

Figure 1.1: Global carbon reservoirs and fluxes The numbers apply for the present-day situation and represent typical literature values Fluxes, e g between atmosphere and surface ocean, are gross annual exchanges Numbers underlined indicate net annual CO2 accumulation due to human action Units are gigatons of carbon (GtC, 1 Gt = 109 metric tons = 1012kg) for reservoir sizes and GtC yr 1 for fluxes More details and discussions are found in several reviews (Sundquist, 1985, Trabalka, 1985, Bolin, 1986 Siegenthaler, 1986)

in Table 1 1, is of the order of 50 - 200 years, determined mainly by the slow exchange of carbon between surface waters and the deep ocean The adjustment time is important for the discussions on global warming potential, cf Section 2 2 7

Because of its complex cycle, the decay of excess CO2 in the atmosphere does not follow a simple exponential curve, and therefore a single time scale cannot be given to characterize the whole adjustment process toward a new equilibrium The two curves in Figure 1 2, which represent simulations of a pulse input of CO2 into the atmosphere using atmosphere-ocean models (a box model and a General Circulation Model (GCM)), clearly show that the initial response (governed mainly by the uptake of CO2 by ocean surface waters) is much more rapid than the later response (influenced by the slow exchange between surface waters and deeper layers of the oceans) For example, the first reduction by 50 percent occurs within some 50 years, whereas the reduction by another 50 percent (to 25 percent of the initial value) requires approximately another 250 years The concentration will actually never return to its original value, but reach a new equilibrium level, about 15 percent of the total amount of CO2 emitted will remain in the atmosphere

Figure 1.2: Atmospheric CO2 concentration excess after a pulse input at time 0 (initially doubling the atmospheric CO2 concentration), as calculated with two ocean-atmosphere models Solid line 3-dimensional ocean-circulation model of Maier-Reimer and Hasselmann (1987), dashed line 1-dimensional boxdiffusion model of Siegenthaler and Oeschger (1987) The adjustment towards a new equilibrium does not follow an exponential curve, it is very fast during the first decade, then slows down more and more The concentration excess does not go to zero, after a long time, a new equilibrium partitioning between atmosphere and ocean will be reached, with about 15 percent of the input residing in the atmosphere

12	11 The 1 ole of the atmosphet e

The mean annual concentration of CO2 is relatively homogeneous throughout the troposphere because the troposphere is mixed on a time scale of about 1 year The pre-industrial atmospheric CO2 concentration was about 280 ppmv, as reconstructed from ice core analyses (c f Section 124 1), corresponding to an atmospheric amount of 594 Gigatonnes of carbon (GtC 1 Gt = 10^t = 1012 * * 15g, 1 ppmv CO2 of the global atmosphere equals 2 12 GtC and 7 8 Gt CO2), today, the level is about 353 ppmv (Figures 1 3 and 1 4) The atmospheric increase has been monitored since 1958 at a growing number of stations (Keeling and Heimann, 1986, Keeling et al , 1989a, Beardsmore and Pearman, 1987, Conway et al, 1988)

12 12 The 1 ole of the ocean

On time scales of decades or more, the CO2 concentration

of the unperturbed atmosphere is mainly controlled by the exchange with the oceans, since this is the largest of the carbon reservoirs There is a continuous exchange of CO2 in both directions between the atmosphere and oceans The net flux into (or out of) the ocean is driven by the difference between the atmospheric partial pressure of CO2 and the equilibrium partial pressure of CO2 (pCCh) in surface waters

The exchange of carbon between the surface and deeper layers is accomplished mainly through transport by water

Figure 1.3: Atmospheric CO2 mcrease m the past 250 years, as indicated by measurements on air trapped in ice from Siple Station, Antarctica (squares, Neftel et al, 1985a, Fnedli et al, 1986) and by direct atmospheric measurements at Mauna Loa, Hawaii (triangles, Keeling et al, 1989a)

Year

Figure 1.4: Monthly average CO2 concentration in parts per million of dry air, observed continuously at Mauna Loa, Hawaii (Keeling et al 1989a) The seasonal variations are due primarily to the withdrawal and production of CO2 by the terrestrial biota

motions Ventilation of the thermocline (approximately the uppermost km of the ocean) is particularly important for the downward transport of anthropogenic CO2 The deep circulation is effective on time scales of 100-1000 years

The natural carbon cycle in the ocean and in particular pCO2 in surface ocean water are strongly influenced also by biological processes The marine biota serve as a 'biological pump , transporting organic carbon from surface waters to deeper layers as a rain of detritus at a rate of about 4 GtC per year (Eppley and Peterson 1979) which is balanced by an equal upward transport of carbon by deeper water richer in CO2 than surface water This biological pump has the effect of reducing surface pCC>2

very substantially without the biological pump ("dead ocean ) the pre-industrial CCb level would have been higher than the observed value ol 280 ppmv, at perhaps 450 ppmv (Wenk, 1985, Bacastow and Maier-Reimer, 1990) Alterations in the marine biota due to climatic change could therefore have a substantial elfect on CO2 levels in the future Note, however, that the "biological pump" does not help to sequester anthropogenic CO2 (see Section 12 4 2)

12 13 The lole of tenestiial\egetation and sods

The most important processes in the exchange of carbon are those of photosynthesis, autotrophic respiration (1 e , CO2 production by the plants) and heterotrophic (1 e , essentially microbial) respiration converting the organic material back into CO2 mainly in soils (c f Section 10 for a detailed discussion) Net primary production (NPP) is the net annual uptake of CO2 by the vegetation, NPP is equal to the gioss uptake (gross primary production, GPP) minus autotiophic respiration In an unperturbed world, NPP and decomposition by heterotrophic respiration are approximately balanced on an annual basis, iormation of soils and peat corresponds to a (relatively small) excess of NPP

The carbon balance can be changed considerably by the direct impact of human activities (land use changes, particularly deforestation), by climate changes, and by other changes in the environment, e g , atmospheric composition Since the pools and fluxes are large (NPP 5060 GtC per year, GPP 90 120 GtC per year, Houghton et al 1985b) any perturbations can have a significant effect on the atmospheric concentration of CO2

1.2.2	Anthropogenic Perturbations

The concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere are primarily allected by two anthropogenic processes release of CO2 from fossil fuel combustion, and changes in land use such as deforestation

12 2 1 Histoiical fossil fuel input

The global input of CO2 to the atmosphere from fossil fuel combustion, plus minor industrial sources like cement production, has shown an exponential increase since 1860 (about 4% per year), with majoi interruptions during the two world wars and the economic ciisis in the thirties (Figure 1 5) Following the 'oil crisis of 1973, the rate of increase of the CO2 emissions lust decreased to approximately 2% per year, and after 1979 the global emissions remained almost constant at a level ol 5 3 GtC per year until 1985, when they started to rise again, reaching 5 7 GtC per year in 1987 (Figure 1 5) The cumulative release of CO2 from fossil fuel use and cement manufacturing from 1850 to 1987 is estimated at 200 GtC ± 10% (Marland, 1989)

Ninety five percent of the industrial CO2 emissions are lrom the Northern Hemisphere, dominated by mdustnal

100

>,

3

0J

ra X

c o

75 1 0

□

O

CL

CM o o

□_

0 \-

1860	1880	1900	1920	1940	1960	1980	2000

Year

Figure 1.5: Global annual emissions of CO2 from fossil fuel combustion and cement manufacturing, expressed in GtC yr' (Rotty and Marland, 1986, Marland, 1989) The average rate of increase in emissions between 1860 and 1910 and between 1950 and 1970 is about 4% per year

countries, where annual releases reach up to about 5 tC per capita (Rotty and Marland, 1986) In contrast, CO2 emission rates in most developing countries lie between 0 2 and 0 6 tC per capita per year However, the relative rate of increase of the CO2 emissions is much larger in the developing countries (~ 6% per year), showing almost no slowing down after 1973 in contrast to Western Europe and North America where the rate of increase decreased from about 3% per year (1945-72) to less than 1% per year (1973-84)

1 2 2 2 Hi stone al land use changes

The vegetation and soils of unmanaged forests hold 20 to 100 times more carbon per unit area than agricultural systems The amount of carbon released to the atmosphere compared to that accumulated on land as a result of land use change depends on the amounts of carbon held in biomass and soils, rates of oxidation of wood products (either rapidly through burning or more slowly through decay), rates of decay of organic matter in soils, and rates of regrowth of forests following harvest or abandonment of agricultural land The heterogeneity of terrestrial ecosystems makes estimation of global inventories and fluxes difficult

The total release of carbon to the atmosphere from changes in land use, primarily deforestation, between 1850 and 1985 has been estimated to be about 115 GtC (Houghton and Skole, 1990), with an error limit ol about ±35 GtC The components of the flux to the atmosphere are (1) burning associated with land use change, (2) decay

of biomass on site (roots, stumps, slash, twigs etc ), (3) oxidation of wood products removed from site (paper, lumber, waste etc ), (4) oxidation of soil carbon, minus (5) regrowth of trees and redevelopment of soil organic matter following harvest Although the greatest releases of carbon in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were from lands in the temperate zone (maximum 0 5 GtC per year), the major source of carbon during the past several decades has been from deforestation in the tropics, with a significant increase occurring since 1950 Over the entire 135 yr period, the release from tropical regions is estimated to have been 2-3 times greater than the release from middle and high latitudes Estimates of the flux in 1980 range from 0 6 to 2 5 GtC (Houghton et al , 1985a, 1987, 1988, Detwiler and Hall, 1988) virtually all of this flux is from the tropics The few regions for which data exist suggest that the annual flux is higher now than it was in 1980

1.2.3	Long-Term Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Variations The most reliable information on past atmospheric CO2 concentrations is obtained by the analysis of polar ice cores The process of air occlusion lasts from about 10 up to 1000 years, depending on local conditions (e g , precipitation rate), so that an air sample in old ice reflects the atmospheric composition averaged over a corresponding time interval

Measurements on samples representing the last glacial maximum (18,000 yr before present) fiorn ice cores from Greenland and Antarctica (Neftcl et al , 1982 1988 Delmas et al , 1980) showed CO2 concentrations of 180200 ppmv 1 e , about 70 percent of the pre-industnal value Analyses on the ice cores from Vostok, Antarctica, have provided new data on natural variations of CO2, covering a full glacial interglacial cycle (Figure 1 6, Barnola et al 1987) Over the whole period there is a remarkable correlation between polar temperature, as deduced from deuterium data, and the CO2 piofilc The glacial-mterglacial shifts of CO2 concentiations must have been linked to large-scale changes in the circulation of the ocean and in the whole interplay of biological, chemical and physical piocesses, but the detailed mechanisms are not yet veiy cleai The CO2 variations were large enough to potentially contribute, via the greenhouse effect, to a substantial (although not the major) part ol the glacial-interglacial climate change (Hansen et al , 1984, Bioccoh and Manabe 1987)

Ice coic studies on Greenland ice indicate that during the last glaciation CO2 concentration shifts of the order of 50 ppmv may have occurred within less than 100 years (Stauffer ct al , 1984), paiallcl to abrupt, diastic climatic events (tcmpeiatuie changes of the order of 5°C) These rapid CO2 changes have not yet been identified in ice coics from Antaictica (possibly due to long occlusion times.

Figure 1.6: CO2 concentrations (bottom) and estimated temperature changes (top) during the past 160,000 years, as determined on the ice core from Vostok, Antarctica (Barnola et al 1987) Temperature changes were estimated based on the measured deuterium concentrations

Neftel et al , 1988), therefore, it is not yet clear if they are real or represent artefacts in the ice record

1.2.4 The Contemporary Record of Carbon Dioxide -Observations and Interpretation

124 1 The cat bon dioxide mci ease f> om pi e-industi tai peiiod

Relatively detailed CO2 data have been obtained for the last millennium from Antarctic ice cores (Neftel et al , 1985a, Friedli et al , 1986, Siegenthaler et al , 1988, Raynaud and Barnola, 1985, Pearman et al , 1986) They indicate that during the period 1000 to 1800, the atmospheric concentration was between 270 and 290 ppmv The relative constancy seems surprising in view of the fact that the atmosphere exchanges about 30 percent of its CO2 with the oceans and biota each year This indicates that the sensitivity of atmospheric CO2 levels to minor climatic changes such as the Little Ice Age (lasting from the end of the 16th to the middle of the 19th century), when global mean temperatures probably decreased by about 1°C, is small

A piecise reconstruction of the CCh increase during the past two centunes has been obtained from an ice core from Siple Station, Antaictica (Figure 1 3, Ncftel et al , 1985a, Fnedli et al, 1986) These lesults indicate that CO2 staited to use around 1800 and had already increased by about 15 ppmv by 1900 Precise direct atmospheric measurements started in 1958, when the level was about 315 ppmv and the rate ol increase 0 6 ppmv per year The present atmospheric CO2 level has reached 353 ppmv, and the mean growth rate has now reached about 1 8 ppmv per year (Figure 1 4, Keeling et al, 1989a)

1 2 4 2 Uptake b\ the ocean

The ocean is an important reservoir for taking up anthropogenic CO2 The relative increase of dissolved inorganic carbon (total CO2) in ocean water is smaller than in the atmosphere (only 2-3 percent until now see below) Precise measurements of dissolved inorganic carbon can be made with present analytical tools However, an accurate determination of the trend in dissolved inorganic carbon is difficult because of its variability in time and space Hence, iepeated transects and time series will be required to assess the total oceanic CO2 uptake with good precision

The net flux ol CO2 into (or out of) the ocean is given by the pioduct of a gas transfer coefficient and ApCO2 (the CO2 partial pressure difference between ocean and atmosphere) The gas tiansler coefficient increases with incicasing wind speed and also depends on water tempeiatuie Therefore, the net flux into the ocean can be estimated liom a knowledge of the atmospheric CO2 concentration pCCh in surface water (for which the data aie still sparse), the global distribution of wind speeds ovei the ocean as well as the relation between wind speed and gas tianslei coellicient (which is known to ±30% only) There have been several estimates of the global net uptake ol CO2 by the oceans using observations (e g Enting and Pearman 1982 1987) The most 1 ecent estimate yields 1 6 GtC per year (Tans et al , 1990) the error of this estimate is, according to the authors, not easy to estimate

Estimates of oceanic CO2 uptake in the past and in the futuic iequne models of the global carbon cycle that take into account air-sea gas exchange aqueous carbonate chemistiy and the tiansport from the surface to deep ocean layers The aqueous carbonate chemistry in sea water opeiates in a mode that if the atmospheric CO2 concentration increases by e g 1 OCT then the con-ccntiation ol dissolved inorganic carbon in sea water increases by only about 1% at equilibuum Therefore, the ocean is not such a powerful sink foi anthropogenic CO2 as might seem at fust when comparing the relative sizes of the ieseivoirs (Figuie 1 1)

The late at which anthropogenic CO2 is tiansportcd horn the suiiace to deeper ocean layeis is determined by the iale of watei exchange in the vertical It is known liom

measurements of the radioactive isotope 14C that on average it takes hundreds to about one thousand years for watei at the surface to penetrate to well below the mixed layer of the majoi oceans (e g , Biocckci and Peng, 1982) Thus, in most oceanic regions only the top seveial hundred metres of the oceans have at pi esent taken up significant amounts of anthropogenic CO2 An exception is the North Atlantic Ocean whcic bomb-produced tritium has been observed even near the bottom of the sea, indicating the active formation of new deep waler

The lain of biogenic detrital particles, which is important for the natural caibon cycle, does not significantly contribute to a sequestenng of excess CO2, since the marine biota do not directly respond to the CO2 increase Their activity is contioiled by other factors, such as light, temperature and limiting nutrients (e g , nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon) Thus only the input of fertilizers (phosphate, nitrate) into the ocean through human activities may lead to an additional sedimentation of organic carbon in the ocean, different authors have estimated the size of this additional sink at between 0 04 and 0 3 GtC per year (see Baes et al 1985) It seems thus justified to estimate the fossil fuel CO2 uptake to date considering the biological flux to be constant as long as climatic changes due to increasing greenhouse gases, or natural causes, do not modify the marine biotic processes Although this appears a icasonable assumption for the past and present situation, it may well not be so in the future

The carbon cycle models used to date to simulate the atmosphere-ocean system have often been highly simplified, consisting of a few well-mixed or diffusive reservoirs (boxes) (e g , Oeschger et al , 1975, Broecker et al, 1980, Bolin, 1981, Enting and Pearman, 1987, Siegenthalei, 1983) Even though these box models are highly simplified they are a powerful means for identifying the importance of the different processes that determine the flux of CO2 into the ocean (e g , Broecker and Peng, 1982, Peng and Broecker 1985) The results of these models are considered to be reasonable because, as long as the ocean circulation is not changing, the models need only simulate the transport of excess CCb from the atmosphere into the ocean, but not the actual dynamics of the ocean In the simple models, the oceanic transport mechanisms e g, formation ol deep water are parameterized The transport parameters (e g , eddy diffusivity) are determined from observations of transient tracers that are analogues to the flux of anthropogenic CO2 into the ocean If a model reproduces correctly the observed distribution of, eg, bomb produced 14c, then it might be expected to simulate reasonably the flux ol CO2 into the ocean A 1-D box-dilfusion model yields an oceanic uptake of 2 4 GtC per yeai on aveiagc foi the decade 1980 - 1989, and an outciop-diflusion model (both described by Siegenthaler, 1983) 3 6 GtC per year The lattei model most probably

ovcrpiedicls the flux into the ocean, because it includes an infinitely fast exchange between high-latitude surface waters and the deep ocean

However it is obviously desirable to use 3-dimensional (3-D) general circulation models of the oceans for this purpose At this time, only a few modelling groups have started to do this One 3-D model (Maier-Reimer and Hasselmann, 1987) gives a similar CO2 uptake as a 1-D box-diffusion model of Siegenthaler (1983), as illustrated by the model response to a pulse input of CO2 (Figure 12) In a recent revised version of this model (Maier-Reimer et al , personal communication) the ocean takes up less CO2, about 1 2 GtC per year on average for the decade 1980 - 1989 The GFDL 3-D ocean model (Sarmiento et al 1990) has an oceanic uptake of 1 9 GtC per year for the same period 3-D ocean models and especially coupled atmosphere ocean models are the only means to study in a realistic way the feedback effects that climate change may have on atmospheric CO2 via alteration of the ocean circulation (cf Section 12 7 1) However, models need to be constrained by more data than are presently available

The oceanic uptake of CCD for the decade 1980 - 1989, as estimated based on carbon models (e g Siegenthaler and Oeschger, 1987, Maier-Reimer et al personal communication, 1990, Goudriaan, 1989, Sarmiento et al , 1990) is in the range 2 0±0 8 GtC per year

1 2 4 3 Redistiibutionofanthiopos’enic cai bon dioxide During the period 1850 to 1986, 195±20 GtC were released by fossil fuel burning and 117±35 GtC by deforestation and changes in land use, adding up to a cumulative input of 312±40 GtC

Atmospheric CCD increased from about 288 ppmv to 348 ppmv during this period, coiresponding to (41±6)% of the cumulative input This percentage is sometimes called the airborne fraction , but that term should not be misunderstood all CCD, anthropogenic and non-anthio pogenic is continuously being exchanged between atmosphere ocean and biosphere Conventionally an airborne fraction rclcning to the fossil fuel input only has olten been quoted because only the emissions due to fossil fuel burning are known with good piecision Howevci this may be misleading since the atmospheric inciease is a response to the total emissions We therefore prefer the definition based on the latter The airborne fraction for the penod 1980	1989 (see calculation below) corresponds to

(48±8)% of the cumulative input

In model simulations of the past CCD increase using estimated emissions from fossil fuels and defoiestation it has geneially been found that the simulated mciease is larger than that actually observed An estimate loi the decade 1980 1989 is

Emissions trom fossil fuels into the atmosphere GtC/vr (Figure 1 5)	5 4±0 5

Emissions from deforestation and land use	1 6± 1 0

Accumulation in the atmosphere	3 4+0 2

Uptake by the ocean	2 0±() 8

Net imbalance	1 6±1 4

The result from this budget and from other studies is that the estimated emissions exceed the sum of atmospheric increase plus model-calculated oceanic uptake by a significant amount The question therefore arises whether an important mechanism has been overlooked All attempts to identify such a missing sink in the ocean have however failed so lar A possible exception is that a natural fluctuation in the oceanic carbon system could have caused a decreasing atmospheric baseline concentration in the past few decades, this does not appear likely in view of the relative constancy of the pre-industrial CCD concentration Theie are possible processes on land which could account for the missing CCD (but it has not been possible to verify them) They include the stimulation of vegetative growth by increasing CCD levels (the CCD fertilization effect) the possible enhanced productivity of vegetation under warmer conditions and the direct effect of fertilization from agricultural fertilizers and from nitrogenous releases into the atmosphere It has been estimated that increased fertilization by nitrogenous releases could account for a sequestering of up to a maximum of 1 GtC per year in terrestrial ecosystems (Melillo private communication 1990) In addition changed forest management practices may also result in an increase in the amount of carbon stored in northern mid-latitude forests The extent to which mid-latitude terrestrial systems can sequester carbon befoie becoming saturated and ineffective is unknown As mid latitude terrestrial systems become close to saturation and hence ineffective in sequestering carbon this would allow moie of the CCD to remain in the atmosphere

A technique for establishing the global distribution of surface sources and sinks has been to take global observations of atmospheric CO2 concentration and isotopic composition and to mveit these by means of atmospheric transpoit models to deduce spatial and temporal patterns of surface fluxes (Pearman et al 1983 Pearman and Hyson 1986, Keeling and Heimann 1986) The obseived inter hemispheric CO2 concentration difference (currently about 3 ppmv) is smaller than one would expect given that nearly all fossil releases occur in the Noithein Hemisphere The results of this approach suggest that there is an unexpectedly large sink in the Noithern Hemispheie equivalent to more than halt of the fossil fuel CCD lelease (Enting and Mansbridge 1989 Tans et al 1990 Keeling et al 1989b) Furthctmore it has been concluded that the oceanic uptake compatible with oceanic and atmospheric CCD data and with a 3 dimensional atmospheric transport model is at most 1 GtC

per year (Tans et al., 1990). Thus, a significant terrestrial sink, possibly larger than the oceanic uptake, is suggested by these model analyses.

1.2.4.4	Seasonal variations

Atmospheric CO2 exhibits a seasonal cycle, dominated by the seasonal uptake and release of atmospheric CO2 by land plants. Its amplitude is small (1.2 ppmv peak-to-peak) in the Southern Hemisphere and increases northward to a maximum of order 15 ppmv peak-to-peak in the boreal forest zone (55-65° N).

The amplitude of the seasonal cycle has been observed to be increasing (e.g., Pearman and Hyson, 1981: Bacastow et al., 1985; Thompson et al., 1986). For example, at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, the seasonal amplitude has increased by nearly 20% since 1958. The increase has however, not been monotonic, and different evaluation methods yield somewhat different values; still, it is statistically significant. This increasing amplitude could point to a growing productivity (NPP) of the terrestrial ecosystems, and to a sequestering of carbon by a growing biomass, provided the increase in biomass is not fully compensated by respiration. It is important to note that such a change does not necessarily indicate increased productivity or increased storage of carbon (Pearman and Hyson, 1981; Kohlmaier et al., 1989; Houghton, 1987); it could also be due to, e.g., accelerated soil respiration in winter,

1.2.4.5	Interannual variations

Small imbalances in natural exchange fluxes are reflected in interannual CO2 concentration fluctuations (±1 ppmv over 1-2 years). They are correlated with the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon (Thompson et al., 1986; Keeling et al., 1989a), which suggests a relation to changes in the equatorial Pacific Ocean, where normally the upwelling causes a high pCO2 peak and outgassing of CO2 into the atmosphere. However, a closer inspection shows that this cannot be the dominating mechanism, since during El Nino, the equatorial pCO2 peak disappears (Feely et al., 1987), while atmospheric CO2 grows more strongly than normally. Alternatively, processes in the land biosphere, perhaps in response to climatic events connected with ENSO events, may be responsible. This explanation is supported by one set of stable carbon isotope data on atmospheric CO2 (Keeling et al., 1989a); but not supported by a second set (Goodman and Francey, 1988).

1.2.4.6	Temporal variations of carbon isotopes

The release of CO2 from biospheric carbon and fossil fuels, both having lower 13C/^2C ratios than atmospheric CO2, has led to a decrease of the isotope ratio *3C/I~C in the atmosphere by about lo/oo. The man-made emissions of ^C-free fossil fuel CO2 have likewise caused a decrease of the atmospheric concentration (measured on tree-rings)

of the order of, 2% from 1800 to 1950. Both isotopic perturbations can be used to constrain the history of the anthropogenic release of CO2- The observed decrease of 13C, as observed in air trapped in ice cores (Friedli et al., 1986) and 14C, observed in tree rings, agree, within experimental uncertainty, with those expected from model calculations with the same carbon cycle models as used for studying the CO2 increase (Stuiver and Quay, 1981; Siegenthaler and Oeschger, 1987). The interpretation of 13C trends in tree rings has proven to be difficult because of plant physiological effects on isotope fractionation (Francey and Farquhar, 1982).

1.2.5	Evidence that the Contemporary Carbon Dioxide

Increase is Anthropogenic

How do we know that in fact human activity has been responsible for the well documented 25% increase in atmospheric CO2 since the early 19th century? Couldn't this rise instead be the result of some long-term natural fluctuation in the natural carbon cycle? Simple arguments allow us to dismiss this possibility.

First, the observational CO2 records from ice cores with good time resolution clearly show that the maximum range of natural variability about the mean of 280 ppmv during the past 1000 years was small (10 ppmv over a 100 year time-scale), that is an order of magnitude less than the observed rise over the last 150 years. A value as high as the current level of 353 ppmv is not observed anywhere in the measured ice core record for the atmospheric history during the past 160,000 years; the maximum value is 300 ppmv during the previous interglacial, 120,000 years ago.

Second, the observed rate of CO2 increase closely parallels the accumulated emission trends from fossil fuel combustion and from land use changes (c.f. Section 1.2.2). Since the start of atmospheric monitoring in 1958, the annual atmospheric increase has been smaller each year than the fossil CO2 input. Thus, oceans and biota together must have been a global sink rather than a source during all these years. Further evidence is provided by the fact that the north-to-south CO2 concentration difference has been observed to increase from 1 ppmv in 1960 to 3 ppmv in 1985, parallel to the growth of the (Northern Hemisphere) fossil fuel combustion sources (Keeling et al., 1989a).

Thirds the observed isotopic trends of ^3C and agree qualitatively with those expected due to the CO2 emissions from fossil fuels and the biosphere, and they are quantitatively consistent with results from carbon cycle modelling.

1.2.6	Sensitivity Analyses for Future Carbon Dioxide Concentrations

Future atmospheric CO2 concentrations depend primarily on emission rates from energy use and deforestation, and on the effectiveness of the ocean and land biota as CO2

sinks For the sake of illustration, several schematic scenarios are shown in Figures 1 7 and 1 8 Those of Figure 1 7 are based on prescribed total CO2 emission rates after 1990, for those in Figure 1 8 atmospheric concentrations after 1990 were prescribed and the corresponding emission rates were calculated to fit these concentrations A boxdiffusion model of the global cycle was used for these simulations (Enting and Pearman, 1982, 1987), with an oceanic eddy diffusivity of 5350 m2year_I and an air-sea gas exchange rate corresponding to an exchange coefficient of 0 12 year-1 The calculations assume no biospheric-climate feedbacks, and also assume that after 1990 the net biospheric input of CO2 is zero, 1 e , the input of CO2 from tropical deforestation is balanced by uptake of CO2 by terrestrial ecosystems

In case a (all emissions stopped Figure 1 7), the atmospheric concentration declines, but only slowly (from 351 ppmv in 1990 to 331 ppmv in 2050 and 324 ppmv in 2100), because the penetration of man-made CO2 to deeper ocean layers takes a long time Even if the emissions were reduced by 2% per year from 1990 on (case b), atmospheric CO2 would continue to increase for several decades Case c (constant emission rate after 1990) gives CO2 levels of about 450 ppmv in 2050 and 520 ppmv in 2100 A constant relative growth rate of 2% per year (case d) would yield 575 ppmv in 2050 and 1330 ppmv in 2100 Comparison of cases b, c and d clearly shows that measures to reduce emissions will result in slowing down the rate of atmospheric CO2 growth

Cases b and c, in comparison to b and c, schematically illustrate the eflect of reducing emissions in 2010 instead of in 1990

If an (arbitrary) threshold ol 420 ppmv 1 e , 50% above pre-industrial, is not to be exceeded (case e, Figure 1 8), then CO2 production rates should slowly decline, reaching about 50% of their present value by 2050 and 30% by 2100 In order to keep the concentration at the present level (case f) emissions would have to be reduced drastically to 30% of present immediately and to less than 20% by 2050

The icsults of scenario calculations with a 3-D oceanatmosphere model (Maier-Reimer and Hasselmann, 1987, Maier Reimer et al , personal communication, 1990 -revised model) give higher concentrations than those shown in Figure 1 7 obtained with a box-diffusion model, for instance, about 480 ppmv in the year 2050 and about 560 ppmv in the year 2100 for Scenario C, compared to about 450 ppmv and 520 ppmv On the other hand, calculations with a box model that includes a biospheric CO2 sink (Goudriaan, 1989) yields somewhat lower concentrations than shown in Figure 1 7, for instance about 415 ppmv in the year 2050 and 460 ppmv in the year 2100 for Scenario C

Figure 1.7: Future atmospheric CO2 concentrations as simulated by means of a box-diffusion carbon cycle model (Enting and Pearman, 1982, 1987) for the following scenarios (a) - (d) anthropogenic CO2 production rate p prescribed after 1990 as follows (a) p = 0, (b) p decreasing by 2% per year, (c) p = constant, (d) p increasing at 2% per year Scenarios (b ) and (c ) p grows by 2% per year from 1990-2010, then decreases by 2% per year (b) or is constant (c ) Before 1990, the concentrations are those observed (cf Figure 1 3), and the production rate was calculated to fit the observed concentrations

Figure 1.8: Future CO2 production rates calculated by means of a box-diffusion carbon cycle model (Enting and Pearman, 1982, 1987) so as to yield the prescribed atmospheric CO2 concentrations after 1990 (e) concentration increasing steadily (logistic function of time) to 420 ppmv (f) concentration constant after 1990

1.2.7	Feedbacks from Climate Change into the Carbon Dioxide Cycle

As increasing greenhouse gas concentrations alter the Earth s climate, changing climate and environmental conditions in their turn act back on the carbon cycle and

atmospheiic CO? The climate change Earth has exp erienced in the recent past is still within the range of natural short-term variability, and so are probably theiclore the ieedback eflects of anthropogenic climate change However, as the changes in the climate become larger than natural climatic variation the magnitude of the feedback effects should begin to have a significant effect These feedbacks could in geneial be either positive (amplifying the initial changes) or negative (attenuating them)

1271 Oceanic feedback effects

The following are possible feedback effects on the ocean atmospheie carbon system

12 711 Ocean tempeiatmc Ocean temperature changes can affect sea water CO2 chemistry Surlace-water pCO2 will inciease with increasing temperatuie, tending to deciease the net uptake by the oceans The future atmospheiic CO2 mciease may be amplified by something like 5 peicent due to this effect (Lashof 1989)

12712 Ocean cuculation The ocean circulation may change in response to climatic change As a consequence of increasing surlace water temperatures the thcimochnc may become more resistant to veitical mixing and slow down the uptake of anthropogenic CO2 Modified wind stress may affect the ocean circulation Howevei, the overall change in ocean dynamics and consequently in CO2 uptake due to a climatic change cannot be estimated from simple considerations, a proper evaluation of such an effect can only be done using dynamical ocean models Studies on Greenland ice cores indicates that during the last glaciation, significant CO2 concentiation shifts may have occurred within less than 100 years (c f Section 1 2 3) piobably caused by strong changes of laige-scale ocean circulation Therefore, the possibility that, due to climatic changes unexpected abrupt events may take place in the natuial caibon system cannot be excluded

12 711 Gas c \cham>e iates A change in the global wind pattern could influence the gas transfer from the atmospheie to the sea surface Carbon cycle models show that the net CO2 uptake by the global ocean is not sensitive to the gas transfer coefficients (because it is controlled mainly by vertical mixing, not by gas exchange, Oeschger et al 1975 Broecker et al 1980 Sarmiento et al 1990) so this el feet would probably be of minor influence

12 7 14 Mochfic ation of oceanic bioycoc lienncal c \c lint’ The tain of dead 01 game particles coriesponds to a continuous export flux of carbon (and nutnents) out of the ocean surface which undei non-peituibed conditions is balanced b\ an equal upward tianspoil of dissolved caibon

(and dissolved nutrients) by water motion In polar regions and stiong upwelling zones, where productivity is not limited by nitrogen 01 phosphorus, the balance could become disturbed consequent on variations in ocean dynamics (c f Section 12 7 12), so as to influence atmospheric CO2 As a result of climate change, the distribution of marine ecosystems and species composition could change, which could affect pCC>2 in surface waters It is not possible at present to predict the direction and magnitude of such effects

Wanning of the oceans might lead to accelerated decomposition of dissolved organic carbon, converting it into CO2 and thus amplify the atmospheric increase (Brewer, peisonal communication, 1990)

12 7 15 UV B ladiation A 1 eduction in stratospheric O3 would increase the intensity of UV-B radiation at the Earths surface This might have negative effects on the marine biota due to a decrease of marine productivity and thus on the biological caibon pump This could lead to an increase in the concentration of CO2 in surface waters and consequently in the atmosphere

1 2 7 2 Ten esti lai hiosphei ic jeedbacks

The following are probable feedback effects on the terrestrial biosphere atmospheric carbon system

1 2 72 1 Caibon dioxide fei tilization Short-term experiments under controlled conditions with crops and other annuals, as well as with a few perennials, show an increase in the rates of photosynthesis and growth in most plants under elevated levels of CO2 (Strain and Cure, 1985) If elevated levels of CO2 increase the productivity of natural ecosystems, more carbon may be stored in woody tissue or soil organic matter Such a storage of carbon will withdraw carbon from the atmosphere and serve as a negative ieedback on the CO2 increase Of particular importance is the response of forests (Luxmoore et al , 1986), given that forests conduct about 2/3 of global photosynthesis (50% of this cycles annually through leaves, while 50% is stored in woody tissue) However, it is not clear whether the increases in photosynthesis and growth will persist for more than a few giowing seasons, whether they will occur at all in natuial ecosystems and to what degree they will result in an increased storage of carbon in terrestrial ecosj stems

1 2 7 2 2 Eutiophication and toxification The increased availability of nutrients such as nitrate and phosphate from agricultural fertilizers and from combustion of fossil fuels may stimulate the growth of plants It has been estimated that the effect of eutrophication, both on land and in the oceans, could be as large as 1 GtC per year (Mclillo, pi lvate communication 1990) However, it should be noted

that the greater availability of nutrients has often been associated with increasing levels of acid precipitation and air pollution, which have been associated with a reduction in the growth ol tcriestnal biota

1 2 72 3 Tempeiatuie Under non-tropical conditions, photosynthesis and respiration by plants and by microbes both tend to increase with increasing temperature, but respiration is the more sensitive process, so that a warming of global air temperature is likely to result in an initially increased release of carbon to the atmosphere Estimates indicate that the additional flux might be significant perhaps as large as one or a few GtC per year (Woodwell, 1983, Kohlmaier, 1988, Lashof, 1989, Houghton and Woodwell, 1989) This temperature-enhanced respiration would be a positive feedback on global warming

1 2 724 Watei Changes in soil water may affect carbon lixation and storage Increased moisture can be expected to stimulate plant growth in dry ecosystems and to increase the storage of carbon in tundra peat There is a possibility that stresses biought about by climatic change may be alleviated by increased levels ol atmospheric CO2 At present however, it is not possible to predict reliably cither the geographical distribution of changes in soil water or the net effect of these changes on caibon fluxes and storage in different ecosystems Changes in climate are generally believed to be more important than changes in the atmospheric concentration of CO2 in affecting ecosystem processes (c f Section 10 )

1 2 7 2 5 Cliam>e in y>eot>i aplncal distiibution of sey’dation types In response to environmental change, the structure and location of vegetation types may change If the rate of change is slow, plant distributions may adjust If, however the rate of change is fast, large areas of foiests might not be able to adapt rapidly enough, and hence be negatively affected with a subsequent release of CO2 to the atmosphere

1 2 72 6 UV-B ladiation A reduction in stratospheric O3 would increase the intensity of UV-B radiation at the Earths surface Increased UV-B may have a detrimental effect on many land biota, including crops (Teiamura, 1983), thus affecting the strength of the biospheric sink of CO2 over land

1.2.8	Conclusions

The atmospheric CO2 concentration is now about 353ppmv 25% higher than the pre industrial (1750-1800) value and higher than at any time in at least the last 160,000 yeais This use, currently amounting to about 1 8 ppmv per year, is beyond any doubt due to human activities Anthropogenic emissions of CO2 were 5 7±0 5

GtC due to fossil fuel burning in 1987, plus 0 6 to 2 5 GtC due to deforestation (estimate for 1980) During the last decade (1980 - 1989) about 48% of the anthiopogemc emissions have stayed in the atmosphere, the remainder has been taken up by the oceans and possibly by land ecosystems Our qualitative knowledge of the global carbon cycle is, in view of the complexity of this cycle, relatively good However, the current quantitative estimates of sources and of sinks of CO2 do not balance the atmospheric increase is less rapid than expected from carbon cycle models (in which CO2 fertilization or environmental responses of the biosphere are not included) This, and model analyses ol the inter-hemispheric CCb giadient, indicate that the Northern Hemisphere terrestrial ecosystems may act as a significant sink of carbon Such a sink has, however, not been directly identified To summarize the total annual input ol anthropogenic CCb is currently (1980-1989) about 7 0±l 1 GtC assuming a central value for the input of CO2 from tropical deforestation, the annual uptake by the oceans is estimated (based on the box models, GCMs and Tans et al 1990) to be about 2 0±l 0 GtC, and the annual atmospheric accumulation is about 3 4±0 2 GtC Thus, the annual sequestering by the terrestrial biosphere should be about 1 6±1 5 GtC While several mechanisms have been suggested that could sequester carbon in terrestnal ecosystems, it is difficult to account for the total required sink Therefore, it appears likely that, (1) the uptake of CO2 by the oceans is underestimated (11) there are important unidentified piocesses in terrestrial ecosystems that can sequester CCb, and/or (111) the amount of CCb released from tropical deforestation is at the low end of cuirent estimates

If the land biota piesently act as a sink of carbon due to a fertilization effect, then they might become saturated with respect to this feitilization at some time in the future This means that we cannot assume that the teriestrial sink which may be active currently, will continue to exist unchanged through the next century

In order to avoid a continued rapid growth of CCb in the atmospheie severe reductions on emissions will be necessary The time taken for atmospheric CCb to adjust to changes in sources or sinks is of the order of 50-200 years, determined mainly by the slow exchange of carbon between surface watei s and deeper layers of the ocean Even if all anthropogenic emissions of CCb weie halted the atmospheric concentration would decline only slowly, and it would not approach its pie-industrial level lor many hundieds of years Thus, any reductions in emissions will only become fully elfective after a time of the order of a century 01 more Based on some model estimates which neglect the feedbacks discussed earlier the atmosphenc concentiation in the year 2050 would be between 530 - 600 ppmv foi a constant relative giowth ol the annual

anthiopogenic emissions by 2% pei year, and between 415 - 480 ppmv (increasing to 460 - 560 ppmv by the year 2100) lor a constant anthiopogenic emission rate at the 1990 level In ordci not to exceed 420 ppmv (50% above pie-industrial), annual anthropogenic emissions would have to be reduced continuously to about 50% of their present value by the year 2050 In order to stabilize concentrations at present day concentrations (353 ppmv), an immediate reduction in global anthropogenic emissions by 60-80 peicent would be necessary The size of the estimated i eduction depends on the carbon cycle model used

Duung the millennium preceding the anthropogenic CO2 giowth, the concentiation was relatively constant near 280 ppmv, with a vaiiability of less than ± 10 ppmv This indicates that the sensitivity of atmospheric CO2 levels to nunoi climatic changes such as the Little Ice Age, where global mean temperatures probably decreased by about 1°C, is within this range However, the anticipated climatic and environmental changes may soon become large enough to act back on the oceanic and teirestnal carbon cycle in a more substantial way A close interaction between climate vanations and the carbon cycle is indicated by the glacial-mterglacial CO2 variations The ice-core record shows that CO2 concentiations during the coldest part of the last glaciation were about 30% lower than during the past 10 000 yeais The glacial interglacial CCb vanations were probably due to changes in ocean circulation and marine biological activity, and were correlated to variations in global climate There is some (not fully clear) evidence hom ice cores that rapid changes of CO2, ca 50 ppmv within about a century, occurred during and at the end of the ice age

If global tempeiatures increase, this could change the natuial fluxes of carbon, thus having feedback effects on atmospheric CO2 Some of the identified feedbacks are potentially large and could significantly mlluencc future CO2 levels They arc difficult to quantify, but it seems likely that there would be a net positive feedback, 1 e , they will enhance the man-made increase On the longer term, the possibility of unexpected large changes in the mechanisms of the carbon cycle due to a human-induced change in climate cannot be excluded

1.3	Methane

Methane is a chemically and radiatively active trace gas that is produced from a wide variety of anaerobic (1 e , oxygen deficient) processes and is primarily removed by reaction with hydroxyl radicals (OH) in the troposphere Oxidation of CH4 by OH in the stratosphere is a significant source of stratospheric water (H2O) where it is an important gieenhouse gas

Figure 1.9: Methane concentrations (bottom) and estimated temperature changes (top) during the past 160,000 years as determined on the ice core from Vostok, Antarctica (Chappelaz et al 1990) Temperature changes were estimated based on the measured deuterium concentrations

1	3.1 Atmospheric Distribution of Methane

13	11 Palaeo-atmosphei 11 1 ec 01 d of methane

There are good data on the atmospheric concentration of CH4 (Figure 1 9) from Antarctic and Greenland ice cores for the period between 10,000 and 160,000 years ago (Raynaud et al 1988, Stauffer ct al , 1988, Craig and Chou, 1982, Chappellaz et al , 1990) The minimum concentration during the last glacial periods (about 20,000 and 150,000 years ago) was around 0 35 ppmv, and rose rapidly, in phase with the observed temperature increases, to about 0 65 ppmv duung the glacial-interglacial transitions (about 15,000 and 130,000 years ago) The atmospheric concentrations of CH4 decreased rapidly, prior to, and during the last deglaciation period about 10,000 11,000 years ago (the Younger Dry as period when there were abrupt temperature decreases in Greenland and northern Europe), and increased tapidly thereafter

Because of the brittle nature of the ice cores, data on the atmosphcnc concentiations of CH4 aie ichablc only duung the last 2,000 years of the Holocene period (last 10 000 years)

13 12 Contempot aiy i ec oi d of methane

Ice core data (Figure 1 10) indicate that the atmospheric concentrations of CH4 averaged around 0 8 ppmv between two hundred and two thousand years ago, increasing to 0 9 ppmv one hundred years ago (Craig and Chou, 1982, Rasmussen and Khalil, 1984, Stauffer et al, 1985, Pearman and Fraser, 1988, Pearman et al , 1986, Etheridge et al ,

1988)	Since then, the atmospheric concentration of CH4 has increased smoothly to present levels, highly correlated with global human population Analysis of infrared solar spectra has shown that the atmospheric concentration of CH4 has increased by about 30% over the last 40 years (Rinsland et al , 1985, Zander et al, 1990)

Atmospheric concentrations of CH4 have been measured directly since 1978 when the globally averaged value was 1 51 ppmv (e g , Rasmussen and Khalil, 1981, Blake and Rowland, 1988) Currently the value is 1 72 ppmv, corresponding to an atmospheric reservoir of about 4900 Tg (1 Tg = 1012 g) and it is increasing at a rate of 14 to 17 ppbv per year (40 to 48 Tg per year), 1 e , 0 8 to 1 0% per year (Blake and Rowland 1988, Steele et al, 1987) The atmospheric concentration of CH4 in the Northern Hemisphere is 1 76 ppmv compared to 1 68 ppmv in the Southern Hemisphere (Figure 111) The magnitude of the seasonal variability varies with latitude (Steele et al 1987, Fraser et al 1984), being controlled by the temporal variability in source strengths and atmospheric concentration of OH radicals

13 13 Isotopic c (imposition of methane

Methane is produced from different sources with distinctive proportions of carbon l2C 1 ^C and 14C, and hydrogen isotopes H, D (~H) and T (^H) Similarly the rates of processes that destroy CH4 depend upon its isotopic composition Consequently the CH4 budget can be constrained by knowledge of the isotopic composition of atmospheric CH4, the extent ot isotopic fractionation dunng removal, and the isotopic signaluics of CH4 from different sources Recent work to elucidate the sources ot CH4 has proceeded through an analysis of carbon isotopic signatures (Cicerone and Oremland 1988 Wahlen et al 1989, Lowe et al , 1988 and icfcrences therein) One example of this is an analysis ot '4C data which suggests that about 100 Tg CH4 pci ycai may ause from fossil sources (Cicerone and Oiemland 1988, Wahlen et al

1989)	Such a distinction is possible because CH4 from fossil sources is '4C-free while that tiom other souices has essentially the '4C concentiation of modem cat bon

1.3.2	Sinks of Methane

The majoi sink foi atmospheric CH4 is reaction with OH in the tiopospheic the OH concentiation being contiollcd by a complex set of ieactions involving CH4 CO NMHC NOX and troposphenc O3 (discussed in Section I 7 S/e

Figure 1.10: Atmospheric methane variations in the past few centuries measured from air in dated ice cores (Etheridge et al 1988 Pearman and Fraser 1990)

	1	1	1	1	  ■	f  -	»-  •  -	r -  M	F	-  1 1 1 1

Figure 1.11: The global distribution, seasonality and trend of methane from the GMCC network (Steele et al, 1987 and unpublished data)

1977, Crutzen 1987) Based on the reaction rate coefficient between CH4 and OH, and the estimated tropospheric distribution of OH an atmospheric lifetime for CH4 ol between 8 and 11 8 years has been estimated (Prinn et al 1987) This estimate is supported by the fact that models ot global OH are tested by analyses of the budgets for CH3CCI3 (Logan et al 1981, Fraser et al 1986a Prinn et al 1987) and '4CO (Appendix to WMO 1989b) The reaction between CH4 and OH currently represents a sink of 400 to 600 Tg of CH4 per year The efficiency of this sink may however have deci eased duung the last centurs because the atmospheric concentiation oi OH in the tiopospheic may have decieased hence the lifetime ol CH4 would have increased in iesponse to increasing concent!ations oi CO NMHC and CH4 (S/e 1977)

Table I 2 Estimated Som ces and Sinks of Methane

Annual Release (Tg CH4)

Range (Tg CH4)

Source

Natural Wetlands (bogs, swamps, tundra, etc)	115	100-	200
Rice Paddies	110	25-	170
Enteric Fermentation (animals)	80	65-	100
Gas Drilling, venting, transmission	45	25-	50
Biomass Burning	40	20-	80
Termites	40	10-	100
Landfills	40	20-	70
Coal Mining	35	19-	50
Oceans	10	5-	20
Freshwaters	5	1 -	25
CH4 Hydrate Destabilization	5	0-	100
Sink			
Removal by soils	30	15	45
Reaction with OH m the atmosphere	500	400-	600
Atmospheric Increase	44	40-	48

Soils may represent a removal mechanism for CH4 The magnitude of this sink has been estimated (this assessment) to be 30±15 Tg CH4 per year from the work of Harriss et al 1982 and Seiler and Conrad, 1987

1.3.3	Sources of Methane

Methane is produced from a wide variety of anaerobic sources (Cicerone and Oremland, 1988) Two mam pathways tor CH4 production have been identified (1) icduction of CO2 with hydrogen, fatty acids or alcohols as hydiogen donors, or (11) transmethylation of acetic acid or methyl alcohol by CH4-producing bacteria Table 1 2 summau/cs identified sources of CH4 with ranges of likely annual emissions The total annual CH4 source must equal the atmosphenc sink oi about 500 (400 to 600) Tg CH4 per year the possible soil sink of about 30 (15 to 45) Tg CH4 per year, and the annual growth of 40 to 48 Tg CH4 in the atmosphere The sum of the present best estimates of the sizes of the individual sources identified in Table 1 2 equal 525 Tg CH4 per year It should be noted that the newest data for rice paddies, biomass burning, and coal mining sources suggest that the values may be even less than those of Table 1 2, possibly indicating a missing source of CH4, or an overestimate of the sink for CH4

13 31 Natui al wetlands

Significant progress has been made in quantifying the magnitude of the source of CH4 from natural wetlands (Svensson and Rosswall, 1984, Sebacher et al , 1986, Whalen and Reeburgh, 1988, Moore and Knowles, 1987, Mathews and Fung, 1987, Harriss et al , 1985, Crill et al, 1988, Andronova, 1990, Harriss and Sebacher, 1981, Burke et al , 1988, Harriss et al , 1988, Aselmann and Crutzen, 1989) Recent data support earlier estimates of a global flux of 110 - 115 Tg CH4 per year, but reverses the lelative importance of tropical and high latitude systems (Bartlett et al , 1990) The data base, which is still quite limited (no data from Asia), suggests 55 Tg CH4 per year (previously 32 Tg CH4 per year) from tropical wetlands, and 39 Tg CH4 per year (previously 63 Tg CH4 per year) from high latitude wetlands Since CH4 is produced through biological processes under anaerobic conditions, any factors affecting the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of soils could affect CH4 emission rates

1 3 32 Rue paddies

Rice paddies are an important source of CH4 with estimates of the globally averaged flux ranging from 25 -170 Tg CH4 pci yeai (Neue and Scharpenseel, 1984, Yagi and Minami, 1990, Holzapfel-Pschoin and Seiler, 1986, Cicerone and Shcttci, 1981, Cicerone et al , 1983) The flux of CH4 from nee paddies is critically dependent upon

several factors including (1) agricultuial practices (e g , fertilization, water management, density of rice plants, double cropping systems, application ol manuie or rice straw), (n) soil / paddy characteristics (soil type, acidity, redox potential, temperature, nutrient availability, substrate, profile of anaerobic environment), and (in) time of season One difficulty in obtaining accurate estimates is that almost 90% of the world s harvested area of rice paddies is in Asia, and of this about 60% are in China and India from which no detailed data are available The annual production of rice since 1940 has approximately doubled as a result of double cropping practices and an increased area of cultivation It is likely that CH4 emissions have increased proportionally as well

13 13 Biomass bin nine,

Biomass burning in tropical and sub tropical regions is thought to be a significant source of atmospheric CH4, with estimates of global emission rates ranging from 20 to 80 Tg CH4 per year (Andreae et al , 1988, Bingemer and Crutzen, 1987, Crutzen et al, 1979, Crutzen et al , 1985, Crutzen 1989, Greenberg et al , 1984 Stevens et al 1990 Quay et al , 1990) Improved estimates require an enhanced understanding of (1) CH4 emission factors, (11) the amount, by type, of vegetation burnt each year on an area basis and (111) type of burning (smouldenng vs flaming) Current estimates indicate that over the last century the rate of forest clearing by burning has mcieased (c f Section 122 2)

1 3 3 4 Entail feimentation (animals)

Methane emissions lrom enteric fermentation in ruminant animals including all cattle, sheep and wild animals is estimated to provide an atmospheric source of 65 - 100 Tg CH4 per year (Crutzen et al , 1986 Lerner et al 1988) Methane emissions depend upon animal populations as well as the amount and type of food It is difficult to estimate the change in this source over the last century accurately because the significant increase in the number of cattle and sheep has been partially offset by decreases in the populations of elephants and North American bison One estimate suggests that the magnitude of this souice has increased from 21 Tg CH4 per year in 1890 to 78 Tg CH4 per year in 1983 (Crutzen et al , 1986)

1335 Teimites

There is a large range in the magnitude of the estimated fluxes of CH4 from termites, 10 - 100 Tg CH4 per year (Cicerone and Oremland, 1988, Zimmerman et al , 1982, Rasmussen and Khalil, 1983, Seilei et al 1984 Fiasei et al 1986b) The values are based on the results of laboiatory cxpciiments applied to estimates of global termite populations and the amount of biomass consumed by teimites both of which aie unceitain, and field

experiments It is important to determine whether the global termite population is currently increasing, and whether it is likely to lespond to changes in climate

13 3 6 Landfills

The anaerobic decay of organic wastes in landfills may be a significant anthropogenic source of atmospheric CH4, 20 -70 Tg CH4 per year However, several factors need to be studied in order to quantify the magnitude of this source more precisely, including amounts, trends, and types of waste materials, and landfill practices (Bingemer and Crutzen, 1987)

13 3 7 Oceans andfieslmatei s

Oceans and freshwaters are thought to be a minor source of atmospheric CH4 The estimated flux of CH4 from the oceans is based on a limited data set taken in the late 1960 s / early 1970 s when the atmospheric concentration of CH4 was about 20% lower They showed that the open oceans were only slightly supersaturated in CH4 with respect to its partial pressure in the atmosphere There are inadequate recent data from either the open oceans or coastal waters to reduce the uncertainty in these estimates (Cicerone and Oremland, 1988)

13 38 Coal mining

Methane is released to the atmosphere from coal mine ventilation, and degassing from coal during transport to an end-use site A recent unpublished study estimated the flux of CH4 from coal mining, on a country basis, for the top twenty coal producing countries, and deduced a global minimum emission of 19 Tg CH4 per year Global CH4 fluxes horn coal mining have been estimated to range from 10 - 50 Tg CH4 per year (Cicerone and Oremland 1988, ICF, 1990, and recent unpublished studies by others)

1 33 9 Gas dulling salting and tiansmission

Methane is the major component of natural gas hence leakage from pipelines and venting from oil and gas wells could represent a significant source of atmospheric CH4 (Cicerone and Oremland, 1988) The global flux from these sources is estimated based on limited data of questionable reliability, to range from 25 - 50 Tg CH4 per year

1.3.4	Feedbacks from Climate Change into the Methane Cycle

Future atmospheric concentrations of CH4 will depend on changes in the strengths of either the sources or sinks which are dependent upon social, economic, and political and also environmental factors and in particular changes in climate Methane emissions from wetlands are particularly sensitive to temperature and soil moisture and hence future climatic changes could significantly change the fluxes of CH4 from both natuial wetlands and rice paddies

Tropospheric OH, which provides the atmospheric sink for CH4, is dependent upon a number of factors, including the intensity of UV-B radiation, and the ambient concentrations of H2O, CO, CH4, reactive nitrogen oxides, and tropospheric O3 (See Section 1.7) (Crutzen, 1987; Isaksen and Hov, 1987; Thompson and Cicerone, 1986).

1.3.4.1	Tropical methane sources

The major sources of CH4 in tropical regions (natural wetlands and rice paddies) are quite sensitive to variations in soil moisture. Consequently, changes in soil moisture, which would result from changes in temperature and precipitation, could significantly alter the magnitude of these large sources of atmospheric CH4. Increased soil moisture would result in larger fluxes, whereas a decrease in soil moisture would result in smaller fluxes.

1.3.4.2	High latitude methane sources

Methane fluxes from the relatively flat tundra regions would be sensitive to changes of only a few centimetres in the level of the water table, with flooded soils producing a factor of 100 more CH4 than dry soils. Similarly, emissions of CH4 are significantly larger at warmer temperatures, due to accelerated microbiological decomposition of organic material in the near-surface soils (Whalen and Reeburgh, 1988; Crill et al.. 1988). Consequently, an increase in soil moisture and temperatures in high latitude wetlands would result in enhanced CH4 emissions, whereas warmer dryer

soils might have decreased CH4 emissions.

Higher temperatures could also increase the fluxes of CH4 at high northern latitudes from; (i) CH4 trapped in permafrost, (ii) decomposable organic matter frozen in the permafrost, and (iii) decomposition of CH4 hydrates (Cicerone and Oremland, 1988; Kvenvolden, 1988; Nisbet, 1989). Quantifying the magnitudes of these positive feedbacks is difficult. Time-scales for thawing the permafrost, located between a few centimetres to metres below the surface, could be decades to centuries, while the time for warming the CH4 hydrates could be even longer, although one study (Kvenvolden, 1988) estimated that the flux of CH4 from hydrate decomposition could reach 100 Tg CH4 per year within a century.

1.3.5	Conclusions

Current atmospheric CH4 concentrations, at 1.72 ppmv, are now more than double the pre-industrial value (1750-1800) of about 0.8 ppmv, and are increasing at a rate of 0.9% per year. The ice core record shows that CH4 concentrations were about 0.35 ppmv during glacial periods, and increased in phase with temperature during glacial-interglacial transitions. The current atmospheric concentration of CH4 is greater than at any time during the last 160,000 years.

Reaction with OH in the troposphere, the major sink for CH4, results in a relatively short atmospheric lifetime of 10±2 years. The short lifetime of CH4 implies that atmospheric concentrations will respond quite rapidly, in

Table 13 Halocarbon Concentrations and Trends (1990) t

Halocarbon	Mixing Ratio pptv		Annual Rate of Increase		Lifetime Years
			PPtv	%	
CCI3F	(CFC-11)	280	9.5	4	65
CCI2F2	((CFC-12)	484	16.5	4	130
CCIF3	(CFC-13)	5			400
C2CI3F3	(CFC-l 13)	60	4-5	10	90
C2CQF4	(CFC-l 14)	15			200
C2CIF5	(CFC-l 15)	5			400
CCI4		146	2.0	1.5	50
CHCIF2	(HCFC-22)	122	7	7	15
CH3CI		600			1.5
CH3CCI3		158	6.0	4	7
CBrClF2	(halon 1211)	1.7	0.2	12	25
CBrF3	(halon 1301)	2.0	0.3	15	110
CH3Br		10-15			1.5

+ There are a few minor differences between the lifetimes reported in this table and the equivalent table in WMO 1989b. These differences are well within the uncertainty limits. The 1990 mixing ratios have been estimated based upon an extrapolation of measurements reported in 1987 or 1988, assuming that the recent trends remained approximately constant.

Figure 1.12: Halocarbon concentrations measured at Cape Grim, Tasmania during the period 1978-1989 (Fraser and Derek, 1989, and unpublished data)

comparison to the longer lived gases such as CO2, N2O, and CFCs, to changes in emissions In order to stabilize concentrations at present day levels, an immediate reduction in global man-made emissions by 15-20 percent would be necessary (this and other scientific sensitivity analyses are discussed in the Annex) Global concentrations of OH are dependent upon the intensity of UV-B radiation, and the concentrations of gases such as H2O. CO, CH4, NOX, NMHC, and O3 and may have declined during the twentieth century due to changes in the atmospheric concentrations ol these gases

The individual sources of atmospheric CH4 have been qualitatively identified, but there are significant un certainties in the magnitude of their strengths Human activities such as rice cultivation, rearing of domestic ruminants, biomass burning, coal mining, and natural gas venting have increased the input of CH4 into the atmosphere, and these combined with an apparent decrease in the concentration of tropospheric OH, yields the observed rise in global CH4 However, the quantitative importance of each of the factors contributing to the observed increase is not well known at present

Several potential feedbacks exist between climate change and CH4 emissions, in both tropical and high latitude wetland sources In particular, an increase in high latitude temperatures could result in a significant release of CH4 from the melting of permafrost and decomposition of CH4 hydrates

1.4	Halocarbons

Halocarbons containing chlorine and bromine have been shown to deplete O3 in the stratosphere In addition, it has been recognized that they are important greenhouse gases Their sources, sinks, atmospheric distributions, and role in perturbing stratospheric O3 and the Earth's radiative balance have been reviewed in detail (WMO 1985, 1989a, 1989b) Many governments, recognizing the harmful effects of halocarbons on the environment, signed the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer' (UNEP 1987) in 1987 to limit the production and consumption of a number of fully halogenated CFCs and halons The control measures of the Montreal Protocol freeze the production and consumption of CFCs 11. 12, 113, 114, and 115 in developed countries at their 1986 levels from the year 1990, a reduction to 80% of their 1986 levels from the year 1993, with a further reduction to 50% of their 1986 levels from the year 1998 Developing countries, with a per capita use of CFCs of less than 0 3 kg per capita, are allowed to increase their per capita use up to this limit and can delay compliance with the control measures by 10 years All major producing and consuming developed countries, and many developing countries, have signed and ratified the Montreal Protocol

1.4.1	Atmospheric Distribution of Halocarbons

The mean atmospheric concentrations of the most abundant radiatively active halocarbons are shown in Table 1 3 The atmospheric concentrations of the halocarbons are currently increasing more rapidly on a global scale (on a percentage

basis) than the other greenhouse gases (Figure 1 12) The concentrations of the fully halogenated chloro fluorocarbons (CFCs), slightly greater in the northern hemisphere than in the southern hemisphere, are consistent with the geographical distribution of releases (>90% from the industrialized nations), a 45°N - 45°S mixing time of about 1 year, and their very long atmospheric lifetimes

1.4.2	Sinks for Halocarbons

There is no significant tropospheric removal mechanism for the fully halogenated halocarbons such as CCI3F (CFC-11), CCI2F2 (CFC 12), C2CI3F3 (CFC 113), C2CI2F4 (CFC-114), C2CIF5 (CFC-115), carbon tetrachloride (CCI4), and halon 1301 (CBrF3) They have long atmospheric lifetimes decades to centuries, and are primarily removed by photodissociation in the mid - upper stiatosphcrc There is currently a significant imbalance between the sources and sinks giving rise to a rapid growth in atmospheric concentrations To stabilize the atmospheric concentiations of CFCs 11, 12 and 113 at current levels would require reductions in emissions of approximately 70-75%, 75-85%, and 85-95%, respectively (see Annex)

Non fully halogenated halocarbons containing a hydrogen atom such as methyl chloride (CH3CI), methylchloroform (CH3CCI3), CHCIF2 (HCFC-22), and a number of other HCFCs and HFCs being considered as substitutes for the current CFCs (c f Section 1 4 4) are pumarily removed in the troposphere by reaction with OH These hydrogen containing species have atmospheric lifetimes ranging from about one to forty years, much shorter on average than the fully halogenated CFCs To stabilize the atmospheric concentrations of HCFC-22 at current levels would require reductions in emissions of approximately 40-50%

1.4.3	Sources of Halocarbons

Most halocarbons, with the notable exception of CH3CI, are exclusively of industrial origin Halocarbons are used as aerosol piopellants (CFCs 11, 12, and 114), refrigerants (CFCs 12 and 114, and HCFC-22) loam blowing agents (CFCs 11 and 12) solvents (CFC-113 CH3CCI3, and CCI4), and fire retardants (halons 1211 and 1301) Current emission fluxes are approximately CFC 11 350Gg/y CFC 12 450 Gg/y CFC-113 150Gg/y HCFC-22 140 Gg/y, others are significantly smallei The atmosphenc concentration of methyl chloride is about 0 6 ppbv, and is primallly released front the oceans and during biomass burning There is no evidence that the atmospheric conccntiation of CH3CI is increasing Methyl bromide (CHsBr) is produced by oceanic algae and there is evidence that its atmosphenc conccntiation has been mcieasing in recent times due to a significant anthropogenic source (Penkett ct al 1985 Wofsy et al 1975)

1.4.4	Future Atmosphenc Concentration of Halocarbons Future emissions of CFCs 11, 12, 113, 114, and 115 will be governed by the Montreal Protocol on "Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer as discussed in Section 1 4 In addition, international negotiations are currently in progress that will likely (1) result in a complete global phase-out of production of these chemicals by the year 2000, and (11) enact limitations on the emissions (via production and consumption controls) of CCI4, and CH3CCI3 However, even with a complete cessation of production of CFCs 11, 12 and 113 in the year 2000 their atmospheric concentrations will still be significant for at least the next century because of their long atmospheric lifetimes It should be noted that emissions of these gases into the atmosphere will continue for a period of time after production has ceased because of their uses as refrigerants, foam blowing agents fire retardants, etc

A number of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and hydrochloiofluorocarbons (HCFCs) are being considered as potential replacements for the long-lived CFCs (11, 12, 113, 114, and 115) that aie regulated under the terms of the Montreal Protocol The HFCs and HCFCs primarily being considered include HCFC 22, HCFC-123 (CHCI2CF3), HCFC 124 (CHCIFCF3), HFC 125 (CHF2CF3), HFC-134a (CH2FCF3), HCFC-141b (CH3CCI2F), HCFC-142b (CH3CCIF2), HFC 143a (CH3CF3), and HFC-152a (CH3CHF2) The calculated atmospheric lifetimes of these chemicals are controlled primarily by reaction with tropospheric OH and range between about 1 and 40 years It has been estimated (UNEP 1989) that a mix of HFCs and HCFCs will replace the CFCs currently in use at a rate of about 0 4 kg of substitute for every kg of CFCs currently produced, with an annual growth rate of about 3% Because of their shorter lifetimes, and expected rates of substitution and emissions growth rates, the atmospheric concentrations of HFCs and HCFCs will be much lower for the next several decades than if CFCs had continued to be used, even at current rates However, continued use, accompanied by growth in the emission rates of HFCs and HCFCs for more than several decades would result in atmospheric concentrations that would be radiatively important

1.4.5	Conclusions

The atmospheric concentrations of the industrially-produced halocarbons, primarily CCI3F, CCI2F2, C2CI3F3, and CCI4 are about 280 pptv, 484 pptv, 60 pptv, and 146 pptv, respectively Over the past few decades their concentrations (except CCI4) have increased more rapidly (on a percentage basis) than the other greenhouse gases, currently at rates of at least 4% per year The fully halogenated CFCs and CCI4 arc primarily removed by photolysis in the stratosphere and have atmospheric lifetimes in excess ol 50 years

Most halocarbons, with the notable exception of methyl chloride, are exclusively anthropogenic and their sources (solvents, refrigerants, foam blowing agents, and aerosol propellants) are well understood.

To stabilize, and then reduce, the current atmospheric concentrations of the fully halogenated CFCs (e.g , 11, 12 and 113) would require approximate reductions in emissions of 70-75%, 75-85%, and 85-95%, respectively. Future emissions of CFCs and CCI4 will, most likely, be eliminated or be significantly lower than today's because the stringency, scope, and timing ol international regulations on chlorine and bromine containing chemicals, (i.e., the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer) are currently being renegotiated. However, the atmospheric concentrations ol CFCs 11, 12 and 113 will still be significant (30 - 40% of current) for at least the next century because of their long atmospheric lifetimes.

Time (year)

1.5	Nitrous Oxide

Nitrous oxide is a chemically and radiatively active trace gas that is produced from a wide variety of biological sources in soils and water and is primarily removed in the stratosphere by photolysis and reaction with electronically excited oxygen atoms.

1.5.1	Atmospheric Distribution of Nitrous Oxide

The mean atmospheric concentration of N2O in 1990 is about 310 ppbv, corresponding to a reservoir of about 1500 TgN, and increasing at a rate of 0 2 - 0.3% per year (Figure 1 13, Weiss, 1981; Pnnn et al, 1990; Robinson et al., 1988; Elkins and Rosscn, 1989, Rasmussen and Khalil, 1986). This observed rate of increase represents an atmospheric growth rate of about 3 to 4.5 TgN per year. The atmospheric concentration of N2O is higher in the Northern Hemisphere than in the Southern Hemisphere by about 1 ppbv Ice coic measurements show that the pre-industrial value of N2O was relatively stable at about 285 ppbv for most of the past 2000 years, and started to increase around the year 1700 (Figure 1 14, Pearman et al , 1986, Khalil and Rasmussen, 1988b, Etheridge et al . 1988; Zardim et al, 1989) Figure 1.14 shows that the atmospheric concentrations of N2O may have decreased by a few ppbv during the period of the "Little Ice Age"

1.5.2	Sinks for Nitrous Oxide

The major atmospheric loss process for N2O is photochemical decomposition in the stratosphere, and is calculated to be 10± 3 Tg N per year (Table 1 4) Nitrous oxide has an atmospheric lifetime ol about 150 years The obscived late of growth represents a 30% imbalance between the sources and sinks (Hao ct al , 1987) Tropospheric sinks such as surface loss in aquatic and soil

Figure 1.13: Atmospheric measurements of nitrous oxide from the NOAA/GMCC network (Elkins and Rossen, 1989)

Figure 1.14: Nitrous oxide measurements from ice-core samples

systems are considered to be small (Elkins et al., 1978, Blackmer and Bremner, 1976).

1.5.3	Sources of Nitrous Oxide

15	3 1 Oceans

The oceans are a significant, but not dominant source of N2O (McElroy and Wofsy, 1986) Based on measurements of the concentration gradients between the atmosphere and surface waters (Butler et al., 1990, and NOAA GMCC unpublished data), and on estimates of the gas exchange coefficient, the current estimate of the magnitude ol the

Table 1 4 Estimated Souices and Sinks ofNitious Oxide

Range

(TgN per year)

Source

Oceans	14-26

Soils (tropical forests)	2 2-37

(temperate forests)	0 7-15

Combustion	0 1-03

Biomass burning	0 02 - 0 2

Fertilizer (including ground-water)	0 01 - 2 2

TOTAL	4 4	10 5

Sink

Removal by soils	7

Photolysis in the stratosphere	7-13

Atmospheric Increase	3	4 5

ocean source ranges from 1 4 - 2 6 Tg N per year, significantly lower than earlier estimates (Elkins et al , 1978, Cohen and Gordon, 1979, Cline et al , 1987) An accurate determination of the global annual ocean flux is difficult because of uncertainties associated with quantifying the gas exchange coefficient and because the paitial pressure of NpO in the surface waters is highly vai table, both spatially and temporally The partial pressure of N2O in surface waters varies considerably, ranging from being supersaturated by up to 40% in upwelling regions to being undersaturated by a few percent in areas around Antarctica and within gyres Data suggest that during El Nino events when upwelling in the Pacific ocean is suppiessed the ocean fluxes of N2O are significantly lower (Cline et al 1987, Butler et al , 1990) It is still unclear whether N2O is primarily produced from nitrification in near suriace waters, or denitrification in oxygen deficient deep waters Based on vertical profile measurements of oceanic N2O (NOAA GMCC, unpublished) the oceanic reservon has been estimated to be between 900 and 1100 Tg N comparable to the atmosphere Consequently, changes in the exchange fluxes of N2O between the ocean and the atmosphere could have a significant impact on its atmospheric concentration

I 5 ? 2 Sails

Denitrification in aerobic soils is thought to be a dominant source ol atmospheric N2O (Keller et al , 1986, Matson

and Vitousek, 1987. Matson and Vitousek 1989, Slemr et al 1984) Nitrification under anaerobic conditions could.

however, produce higher yields of N2O per unit of transformed nitrogen Quantification of global N2O emissions from soils is difficult because of the heterogeneity of terrestrial ecosystems and the variability in environmental conditions that control the fluxes of N2O

Estimates of global fluxes of N2O from tropical forests range from 2 2 - 3 7 Tg N per year The impact of deforestation on the emissions of N2O from tropical soils is unclear, with some studies suggesting that the emissions of N2O from deforested land are enhanced by as much as a factor of three (Luizao et al , 1990), whereas other studies concluded that N2O fluxes decreased if vegetation did not return (Robertson and Tiedje, 1988)

Quantifying the roles of temperate forest soils and grasslands in the N2O budget is difficult because of the paucity of data, and conflicting results Estimates of N2O fluxes from temperate forest soils range from 0 7 - 1 5 Tg N per year in one study (Schmidt et al , 1988), to almost none in another study (Bowden et al , 1990) One study also reported that deforestation in temperate forests would lead to enhanced emissions of N2O (Bowden and Bormann, 1986) Reliable global N2O fluxes from grasslands are impossible to derive from the fragmented data available One study (Ryden, 1981) concluded that English grassland soils, with no fertilization, are a sink for N2O, whereas limited studies of tropical grasslands and pastures suggest that they may be a moderate to significant source of N2O (Luizao et al , 1990, Robertson and Tiedje, 1988)

1 5 3 3 Combustion

Until recently, the combustion of fossil fuels was thought to be an important source of atmospheric N2O (Pierotti and Rasmussen, 1976, Weiss and Craig, 1976, Hao et al , 1987) However, a recent study has shown that the earlier results are incorrect because N2O was being artificially produced in the flasks being used to collect N2O from combustion sources (Muzio and Kramlich, 1988) The latest estimate of the global flux of N2O from combustion sources is between 0 1 and 0 3 Tg N per year, compared to earlier values which were as high as 3 2 Tg N per year

1 5 3 4 Biomass biiinmi’

Biomass burning is now thought to be a minor source of atmospheric N2O with a global flux of less than 0 2 Tg N per year (Muzio and Kramlich, 1988, Crutzen 1989, Elkins et al , 1990, Winstead et al , 1990, Griffith et al , 1990) This value is 1-2 orders of magnitude less than previous estimates (Crutzen et al , 1979, 1985) which were influenced by artifacts involving N2O analysis (Crutzen et al, 1985) and N2O production in sampling flasks (Muzio and Kramlich, 1988)

15 3 5 Feitihzei I Giound-Watei

Nitrous oxide production from the use of nitrate and ammonium fertilizers is difficult to quantify because the N2O fluxes are dependent upon numerous factors including type of fertilizer, soil type, soil temperature, weather, and farming practices (e g , ploughing, sowing, irrigating) Conversion of fertilizer N to N2O ranges from 0 01- 2 0% (Conrad et al , 1983, Bremner et al , 1981) This range, coupled with a global fertilizer production of 55 Tg N per year in 1980, results in a total N2O emission of between 0 01-1 1 Tg N per year (Conrad et al, 1983) Leaching of nitrogen fertilizers from soils into groundwater may result in additional fluxes of N2O up to 1 1 Tg N per year (Conrad et al, 1983, Ronen et al, 1988) Consequently, a range of 0 01 - 2 2 Tg N per year can be derived for the flux of N2O from fertilizer use

1.5.4	Conclusions

Nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas whose atmospheric concentration, at 310 ppbv, is now about 8% greater than in the pre-industnal era, and is increasing at a rate of about 0 2 - 0 3% per year, corresponding to about 3 - 4 5 Tg N per year This represents an excess of 30% of current global emissions over current sinks The major sink for N2O is photolysis in the stratosphere, resulting in a relatively long atmospheric lifetime of about 150 years The magnitude of the sink for N2O is relatively well known (± 30%) In order to stabilize concentrations at present day levels, an immediate reduction of 70 80% of the additional flux of N2O that has occurred since the pre-industnal era would be necessary

Quantification of the various natural and anthropogenic sources is uncertain Since the latest studies indicate that the total combined flux ol N2O irom combustion and biomass burning is between 0 1 to 0 5 Tg N per year in contrast to earlier estimates of about 5 Tg N per year, and production of N2O from fertilizer (including groundwater) is believed to be less than or equal to 2 2 Tg N per year, it is difficult to account for the annual increase based on known sources Stimulation of biological production due to agricultural development may account for the missing anthropogenic emissions Estimates of the removal rate of N2O by photodissociation in the stratosphere range from 7 - 13 Tg N per year Therefore, the total source needed to account for the observed annual atmospheric growth is 10 -17 5 Tg N per year against a flux of N2O from known sources of 4 4 - 10 5 Tg N per year These data suggest that there are missing sources of N2O, or the strengths of some of the identified sources have been underestimated Despite these uncertainties, it is believed that the observed increase in N2O concentrations is caused by human activities

1.6	Stratospheric Ozone

Stratospheric O3 is an important constituent of the Earth s atmosphere It protects the Earth's surface from harmful solar ultraviolet radiation and it plays an important role in controlling the temperature structure of the stratosphere by absorbing both incoming solar ultraviolet radiation and outgoing terrestrial (longwave) radiation Part of the absorbed outgoing longwave radiation is then re-radiated back to the surface-troposphere system Reductions in stratospheric O3 can modify the surface temperature via two competing processes more solar radiation is transmitted to the surface-troposphere system, thereby contributing to a surface warming, on the other hand, the cooler stratosphere (due to decreased solar and long-wave absorption) emits less to the troposphere which would tend to cool the surface The solar warming (a function of total column amount of O3) and longwave cooling (a function of the vertical distribution of O3) are similar in magnitude Therefore, the magnitude as well as the sign of the change in surface temperature depends critically on the magnitude of the O3 change, which in turn is depends strongly on altitude, latitude and season

The concentration and distribution of stratospheric O3 is controlled by dynamical, radiative and photochemical processes Stratospheric O3 is photochemically controlled by chemically active species in the (1) oxygen, (11) hydrogen, (111) nitrogen, (iv) chlorine, and (v) bromine families The precursors for the photochemically active species are (1) O2, (11) H2O and CH4, (111) N2O, (iv) CFCs, CCI4, CH3CCI3, CH3CI, and (v) halons and CH3Br, respectively

1.6.1	Stratospheric Ozone Trends

16	11 Total column ozone tiends

The Antarctic ozone hole, which formed during the mid to late 1970s, recurs every springtime To determine O3 trends more widely, data from the ground-based Dobson network have been re-evaluated, station by station, and used to determine changes in total column O3 over the past two decades Unfortunately, the network and data are adequate for only a limited geographical region, 1 e . 30 -64°N They are inadequate to determine total column O3 changes in the Arctic, tropics, subtropics, or southern hemisphere apart from Antarctica Satellite data can provide the desired global coverage, but the current record is too short (about one solar cycle, 1978 to present) to differentiate between the effects of natural and human influenced processes on O3 The re evaluated data was analysed for the effects of known natural geophysical processes (seasonal variation, the approximately 26-month quasi-bienmal-oscillation, and the 11-year solar cycle) and possible human perturbations After allowing for natural variability, the analyses, using a variety of statistical models and assumptions, showed measurable zonal mean

O3 decreases in the range 3.4% to 5.1% between 30 and 64°N latitude for the winter months (December - March) between 1969 and 1988, with the larger decreases at the higher latitudes (WMO, 1989a,b). No statistically significant zonal trends were found for the summer period (May - August). Lastly, within longitudinal sectors, regional differences in the O3 trends were indicated, with the largest values over North America and Europe and the smallest over Japan.

1.6.1.2	Changes in the vertical distribution of ozone Substantial uncertainties remain in defining changes in the vertical distribution of O3. Analysis of SAGE I and II satellite data, averaged over 20 to 50°N and S latitudes, indicates that near 40 km O3 decreased by (3±2)% between February 1979 - November 1981 and October 1984 - December 1988 (WMO, 1989b). Because the SAGE record is so short (less than one solar cycle), no attempt has been made to distinguish between solar-induced and human-influenced contributions to these changes. A thorough analysis of data from 10 ground-based Umkehr stations in the Northern Hemisphere for the period 1977 to 1987 indicates a statistically significant decrease in O3 between 30 and 43 km. The decrease near 40 km of (4.8±3.1)%, after allowing for seasonal and solar-cycle effects and correcting the data for aerosol interferences, is broadly consistent with theoretical predictions. Based on satellite, ground-based, and ozonesonde data, there are indications of a continuing stratospheric O3 decrease since the late 1970s of a few percent at 25 km and below. Photochemical models (which do not take into account heterogeneous processes) do not predict these changes, but the measurements are qualitatively consistent with those required for compatibility with the total column measurements.

1.6.2	Future Changes

Future changes in stratospheric O3 are critically dependent upon future emissions of CFCs, other halocarbons, CH4, N2O, and CO2. Assuming that the current regulatory measures agreed under the Montreal Protocol are not strengthened, then the chlorine loading of the atmosphere is predicted to reach about 9 ppbv by the year 2060, about three times today’s level, and a bromine loading of about 30 pptv, about twice today's level. Models predict column O3 reductions of 0 to 4% in the tropics, and from 4 to 12% at high latitudes in late winter. These predictions do not include the effects of heterogeneous processes, which play a critical role in the formation of the Antarctic ozone hole. Consequently, models that include the effects of heterogeneous processes would predict larger O3 depletions, at least in polar regions. Ozone is predicted to decrease by 25 - 50% at 40 km and result in stratospheric temperature decreases of 10 to 20 K. If, as expected, the

Montreal Protocol is modified to eliminate the emissions of CFCs 11, 12, 113, 114, 115, halons 1211 and 1301, and restrict the emissions of CCI4 and CH3CCI3, by the year 2000, then the chlorine loading of the atmosphere by the year 2060 will probably lie between 2.5 and 4 ppbv (depending upon the emissions of CCI4 and CH3CCI3, and HCFCs). Models that do not include heterogeneous processes predict that global O3 levels would be similar to today. However, if the atmospheric chlorine loading approaches 4 ppbv the implications for polar O3, and its subsequent impacts on O3 at mid-latitudes, are unknown.

1.7	Tropospheric Ozone and Related Trace Gases (Carbon Monoxide, Non-Methane Hydrocarbons, and Reactive Nitrogen Oxides)

1.7.1	Tropospheric Ozone

Tropospheric O3 is a greenhouse gas, of particular importance in the upper troposphere in the tropics and sub-tropics.Its distribution is controlled by a complex interplay between chemical, radiative, and dynamical processes. Ozone is: (i) transported down into the troposphere from the stratosphere; (ii) destroyed by vegetative surfaces; (iii) produced by the photo-oxidation of CO, CH4, and NMHC in the presence of reactive nitrogen oxides (NOX), and (iv) destroyed by uv-photolysis and by reaction with hydrogen oxide radicals (HO2) (Danielsen, 1968; Mahlman and Moxim, 1978; Galbally and Roy, 1980; Crutzen, 1974; Isaksen et al., 1978). Chemical processes in clouds could have a strong influence on O3 production and destruction rates (Lelieveld and Crutzen, 1990).

Consequently, while CO, NMFIC, and NOX are not important greenhouse gases in themselves, they are important precursors of tropospheric O3 and they are therefore treated in some detail in this sub-section.

1.7.1.1	Atmospheric distribution

Ozone in the troposphere has a lifetime of at most several weeks, hence its concentration varies with latitude, longitude, altitude and season (Chatfield and Harrison, 1977; Logan, 1985). Near the surface, monthly mean concentrations (30 - 50 ppbv) are highest in spring and summer at northern mid-latitudes (Figure 1,15). In the middle troposphere at northern mid-latitudes values are highest also in spring and summer, 60 - 65 ppbv. The summer maximum results from photo-oxidation of O3 precursors from fossil fuel combustion and industrial activity (Isaksen et al., 1978; Fishman et al., 1985; Logan 1985). Ozone values are highest in winter and spring at other latitudes, in part because the stratospheric source is largest then (Levy et al., 1985). There is 35% more O3 at 40“N than at 40°S, in the middle troposphere (Logan, 1985).

Figure 1.15: The seasonal variation of surface ozone The solid line shows data from Montsouns, France, for 1876 86 (Volz and Kley, 1988) All other data are from the 1970s and 1980s dashed line, Arkona, GDR (Feister and Warmbt, 1987), dotted line Ellerslie, Alberta, Canada (Angle and Sandhu, 1986) dot-dash line, average of eight rural sites in the northeastern U S the SURE sites (Logan, 1988) long dashed line Hohenpeissenberg FRG (Logan 1985) All the recent data are shown as monthly means of daily average values

Concentrations of O3 tend to be smaller in the tropics than in mid-latitudes, except in the dry season when emissions of O3 precursors from biomass burning provide a photochemical source (Delany et al, 1985, Crutzen et al, 1985, Logan and Kirchhoff 1986 Fishman et al 1990) Ozone values during the southern spring over South America can reach almost as high values as found ovei the industrialized mid-latitudes in s ummer Lai ge regions of the tiopical tropospheic appear to be influenced by sources of O3 from biomass burning (Fishman et al 1990) Remote marine air and continental air during the wet season may provide a photochemical sink foi O3 in the tropics mean surface concentrations as low as 4	12 ppbv

have been measured (Liu et al 1980 Oltsmans and Komhyi 1986, Kirchhofl 1990)

/ 71 2 Titnds

Most long-term measurements of O3 have been made at northern mid-latitudes from suilacc sites and from balloons Only sporadic data aic available befoie the 1970s A comparison of data obtained in Pans fiom 1876-1910 (Vol/ and Kley 1988) with lural data horn the piesent day from Euiope and Noith Amenca (Logan 1985 1989) suggests that surface O3 has increased by a lactoi ot 2 3 on avetage the increase is hugest in summci the lactoi then being 4 6 (Figure 1 15) O/one values in Euiope in

the 1970s appear to be about twice those found between 1930 and 1950 (Crutzen, 1988) Data from Europe suggest an increase of 1 - 2% per year from the mid-1950s to the early 1980s, with increases in winter and summer (Feister and Warmbt, 1987, Bojkov, 1988) Since the mid-1970s O3 has increased by 0 8% per year at remote sites in Alaska and Hawaii, shown no annual trend at Samoa, but has decreased by 0 5% per year at the South Pole (Oltmans et al, 1988) Decreases of 1 8% per year are found at both Samoa and South Pole in summer Trend data are lacking for tropical continental sites

Ozonesonde data for northern mid-latitudes between 1965 and 1986 suggest that O3 has increased by about 1% per year below 8 km, primarily over North Europe and Japan (Angell and Korshover, 1983, Logan 1985, Tiao et al, 1986, WMO, 1989a,b), but there are no clear trends in the upper troposphere By contrast O3 has decreased in the lower stratosphere (below 25 km), the crossovei in the trend being near the tropopause There is no tiend in O3 at the single sonde station at southern mid-latitudes, and long term sonde data are lacking in the tropics

17	13 Relationships hetv. een ozone and its pi ei m soi s The concentration of tropospheric O3 is dependent in a very non-linear manner on the atmospheric concentrations of its precursor gases, 1 e , CO, CH4, NMHC, and, in particular NOX (NOX = NO + NO2) Nitrogen oxide concentrations and trends control changes in the con centiation of O3 (Dignon and Hameed 1985) At low NOX concentrations (where NOX is less than 5 - 30 pptv this threshold depends on the concentrations of O3 and hydrocarbons) increases in CO CH4 and NMHC lead to a deciease in O3 wheieas at high NOX concentiations increases in CO CH4 and NMHC lead to significant enhancements in O3 Therelore no simple relationship exists between increases in the piecursor gases and changes in tropospheric O3 Several model calculations have been performed to investigate the sensitivity of O3 changes to changes in the precuisoi gases both individually and collectively All models that ha\e attempted to simulate changes in O3 during the past century have calculated increases in Northern Hennspheie O3 by up to a factoi of two broadly consistent with obsei vations, depending upon the assumptions made regarding the initial concentration distribution and changes in precursor gas concentrations particularly NOX

Undeistanding the feedbacks among O3 and its piecuisoi gases is essential to undcistand tioposphcric OH which controls the atmosphenc lifetimes of CH4 and the NMHCs The global concentiation of OH which determines the oxidizing capacity ot the troposphere can be cilhci enhanced because ol clexated levels ol tioposphenc O3 NOX 01 watei vapour (associated with a global warming) 01 suppressed because of increases in

CH4, CO, and NMHC (Crutzen, 1987, Thompson et al , 1989) Prediction of regional and global trends in OH concentrations requires an understanding ol regional emissions of CH4, CO, NMHC and NOX, as well as transport of O3 between its source regions and the remote troposphere One key point is that a continued increase in levels of CO would reduce the global concentration of OH because NOX is too short-lived to counteract that effect over much of the globe This would increase the atmospheric lifetime of CH4

1.7.2	Carbon Monoxide

172 1 Atmospheiic distiibution of caihon monoxide

The atmospheric concentration of CO exhibits significant spatial and temporal variability because of its short atmospheric lifetime (2-3 months) The short atmospheric lifetime, coupled with an inadequate monitoring network, means that the global spatial variability and long-term trends in CO are not well documented The limited observational data base (Heidt et al, 1980, Dianov-Klokov and Yuiganov, 1981, Seiler and Fishman, 1981, Seiler et al, 1984, Khalil and Rasmussen, 1984, 1988a, Fraser et al, 1986a, c, Newell et al , 1989, Zander et al , 1989, Knchholf and Mannho, 1989, Kirchhoff et al , 1989) has demonstrated that the concentration of CO, (1) is about a factoi of two gieater in the Northern than in the Southern Hemisphere where the annual average is about 50 - 60 ppbv, (11) increases with latitude in the Northern Hemisphere, (111) exhibits strong seasonal variations in both hemispheres at mid to high latitudes, and (iv) decreases with altitude CO appears to be increasing at about 1% per year in the Northern Hemisphere, but the evidence for increases in the Southern Hemisphere is ambiguous

1 7 2 2 Sonic es and sinks of caibon monoxide

The total annual source ol CO is about 2400 Tg CO, being about equally divided between direct anthropogenic (incomplete combustion of fossil fuels and biomass) and atmospheric (oxidation ol natural and anthropogenic CH4 and NMHC) souices (Logan et al 1981, Cicerone, 1988) Atmospheric concentrations of CO may have increased in the Northern Hemisphere because of the fossil fuel source, and because ol changes in the rate ol oxidation of CH4, whose atmospheric concentration has increased since pre-mdustrial times Fossil fuel sources of CO are at present decreasing in North America (EPA, 1989) and possibly in Europe, but may be increasing elsewhere

The major removal process for atmospheric CO is reaction with OH (Logan et al 1981) The observed seasonal variability in the Southern Hemisphere distant from seasonally varying sources can be explained by the seasonal variability in the concentration ot tropospheric OH Soils may provide a minor sink for CO (Coniad and Seiler, 1985)

1.7.3	Reactive Nitrogen Oxides

The key constituents of tropospheric NOy, defined as the sum of all nitrogen oxide species except for N2O, are NOX, nitric acid (HNO3), peroxyacetylnitrate (PAN CH3CO3NO?), and organic nitrates Most primary sources of nitrogen oxides release NOX (mainly NO), the other species are produced by photochemical reactions in the atmosphere While the atmospheric lifetime of NOX is short (about 1 day), the atmospheric lifetime of NOy can range up to several weeks Thus NOy can transport nitrogen compounds away from source regions to more remote locations, where photolysis of HNO3 and PAN, and theimal decomposition of PAN, can regenerate NOX

17 3 1 Atmospheiic disti ibution of mti ogen oxides The atmospheric concentrations of NOX exhibit significant spatial and temporal variability, reflecting the complex distribution of sources and the short atmospheric lifetime The near surface and free tropospheric concentrations of NOX each vaiy by several orders of magnitude, highly influenced by the proximity of source regions Near surface concentiations of NOX range from as low as 0 001 ppbv in remote maritime air to as high as 10 ppbv in Europe and Eastern Noith Amenca (excluding urban areas), while free tropospheric concentrations range from 0 02 ppbv in remote regions to more than 5 ppbv over populated areas (Fehsenfeld et al, 1988)

The spatial inhomogeneity, coupled with a sparsity of measurements, means that the spatial and temporal distribution and long-term trends in NOX and NOy are not adequately documented, although reconstructed emissions inventories of NOX suggest large increases throughout this century (Dignon and Hameed, 1989) Data from a Greenland ice core have shown that the concentration of nitrate 10ns (dissolved nitrate from HNO3) remained constant from 10,000 years ago to about 1950, then doubled by the late 1970 s, consistent with the increase in industrial emissions (Neftei et al 1985b) Data from glacier ice in Switzerland indicates that nitrate 10ns increased by a factor of 4 5 between 1900 and the 1970's in Western Europe (Wagenbach et al 1988)

1 7 3 2 Souices and sinks of nitiogen oxides

The sources of atmospheric NOX are about equally divided between anthropogenic (combustion of fossil fuels 21 Tg N per year, and biomass burning 2 - 5 Tg N per yeai), and natural (microbial processes in soils 20 Tg N per year, lightning 2 - 8 Tg N per yeai, and transport from the stratosphere 1 Tg N per year) (Galbally, 1989) Emissions of NOX (6 3 Tg N pei yeai) from the combustion ol fossil fuels have not increased in North America since 1970 (EPA, 1989) Soil emissions of NO are stimulated by agricultural activity (e g , addition of fertilizer, manure,

etc ), hence, agricultural soil emissions may provide significant sources of NOX in many areas

The dominant removal processes for NOX are (1) conversion to HNO3, PAN, and organic nitrates by photochemical mechanisms, (11) reactions involving NO3 radicals, and possibly (111) deposition of NO2 on vegetation The resulting NOy species are then removed from the atmosphere by wet and dry deposition, or by conversion back to NOX

1.7.4	Non-Methane Hydrocarbons

174 1 Atmospheric distribution of non-methane hvdiocai bons

The NMHC can be classified by atmospheric lifetime (1) relatively long-lived (lifetimes > week) where the highest concentrations (up to 3 ppbv for ethane) are observed at middle to high northern latitudes, (11) more reactive (lifetimes between half a day and one week) such as C2 -C5 alkenes whose concentrations exhibit significant temporal and latitudinal variability from <0 lppbv in remote areas to a few ppbv close to source regions, and (111) extremely short lived (lifetimes of hours) such as terpenes or isoprene whose local concentrations may reach about 10 ppbv very close to their sources Trends in the atmospheric concentrations of NMHC have not been established due to a lack of measurements

1 7 4 2 Sonnes and sinks foi non methane hsdiocai boils The oceans are a major source of NMHC. mainly alkenes Estimates of the source strength ol ethene and propene range irom 26 Tg C per year (Bonsang et al . 1988) to as high as 100 Tg C per year (Penkett, 1982) Emissions of NMHC from terrestrial vegetation are dependent upon environmental factors as well as the type of vegetation Isoprene is primarily emitted from deciduous plants, whereas cornier trees aie primarily a souice of terpenes Isoprene and terpene emission rates are very large, about 500 Tg per year lor each (Rasmussen and Khalil, 1988) The souice strength ol NMHC from anthiopogcmc activities such as biomass burning, solvents and fossil luel combustion has been estimated to be about 100 Tg per year

The dominant loss mechanism foi most NMHC is lapid (much faster than CH4) reaction with OH The products of these reactions are capable of forming O3 in the presence ofNOx

1.7.5	Feedbacks Between Climate and the Methane/Non-

Methane Hydrocarbon/ Carbon Monoxide/Oxides of Nitrogen/ Tropospheric Ozone System

There arc numcious potentially impoitant ieedbacks between climate change and tropospheric O3 and OH Changes in cloud cover, precipitation and circulation patterns, as well as changes in the biospheric souice

strengths of CH4, CO, NMHC and NOX, will induce changes in homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions controlling O3 and OH In addition, changes in stratospheric O3 may induce changes in tropospheric processes, through changes in ultraviolet radiation Stratospheric O3 depletion is likely to increase tropospheric O3 when the levels of CO, NOX, and NMHC are high, but reduce it in regions of very low NOX The importance of these feedback processes remains to be determined

1.7.6	Conclusions

Tropospheric O3 is a greenhouse gas that is produced photochemically through a series of complex reactions involving CO, CH4, NMHC and NOX Hence, the distribution and trends of tropospheric O3 depend upon the distribution and trends of these gases whose atmospheric concentrations are changing

The short atmospheric lifetimes of O3 (several weeks), and many of its precursor gases, coupled with inadequate observational networks, leave their distributions and trends inadequately documented Most data support positive trends of about 1% per year for O3 below 8 km altitude in the Northern Hemisphere (consistent with positive trends in several of the precursor gases, especially NOX, CH4, and CO), and a similar trend for CO in the Northern Hemisphere, but not in the Southern Hemisphere While there is no systematic series of data that allow quantitative estimates of trends in NMHC and NOX to be made, their atmospheric concentrations are likely to have increased during the past few decades because of increased anthropogenic sources The ice core records of nitrate levels provide indirect evidence for a Northern Hemisphere increase in atmospheric NOX

1.8	Aerosol Particles

1.8.1	Concentrations and Trends of Aerosol Particles in the Troposphere

Aerosol particles play an important role in the climate system because of their direct interaction (absorption and scattering) with solar and terrestrial radiation, as well as through their influence on cloud processes and thereby, indirectly, on radiative fluxes These processes are discussed in more detail in Sections 2 3 2 and 2 3 3 Two separate issues should be identified The first is the effect of increasing or decreasing anthropogenic emissions of aerosol particles and their precursors in regions impacted by these emissions The second is the role of feedback processes linking climate change and natural (biological) pioduction ol particles in unpolluted regions, especially over the oceans (cl Section 10 8 3)

Total suspended particulate mattei in an varies from less than 1 pg m"1 ovei polar ice caps or in the tree mid-ocean

tioposphere to 1 mg m’3 in desert dust outbreaks or in dense plumes from for example, forest fires In a typical sample of continental air, mineral dust, sulphuric acid, ammonium sulphate as well as organic material and elemental carbon (soot) may be found both as pure or mixed particles Most of the soluble particles become solution droplets at relative humidities above 80%, thus the radiative properties of aerosol particles even vary with relative humidity at constant dry aerosol mass

A large part of the aerosol mass in submicron size particles is derived from gas-to-particle conversion through photochemical processes involving gaseous sulphur and hydrocaibon compounds Such conversion may take place thiough photochemical processes involving the oxidation ol sulphur dioxide (SO2) and other sulphur gases to sulphuric acid (H2SO4) by reaction with OH The H2SO4 so lormed, having a low equilibrium vapoui pressure, immediately condenses onto existing aerosol particles or forms new ones Transformation to sulphuric acid and sulphate also takes place in cloud droplets, the majority of which eventually evaporate leaving the sulphate in the aerosol phase Trends in the emission of these gaseous precursors especially the sulphur gases, are therefore of great importance for the regional aerosol burden and thereby potentially lor climate

Large quantities of aerosol particles are also emitted from the burning of savannas and forests in tropical regions The directly emitted particles consist largely of carbonaceous materials including black carbon (soot) (Andreae et al 1988) In addition particles are formed from precursor gases like SO2 and hydrocarbons emitted by fires

The average tropospheric lifetime of aerosol particles and of their precursor gases is of the order of only days or weeks This is much shorter than the lifetime of most greenhouse gases It implies that the atmospheric loading at any one time reflects the emissions that have taken place during the past tew weeks only No long-term accumulation in the troposphere is thus possible and any reduction in anthropogenic emissions will immediately result in a corresponding reduction in tropospheric concentrations The short lifetime also implies large spatial and temporal variability in the concentrations of aerosol particles

It has been established from analyses of Greenland ice cores that the amounts of sulphate, nitrate and tiace metals denved mainly from atmospheric aerosols have been increasing since industrialisation began (Neftel et al 1985b Mayewsky et al, 1986) However, there are almost no long-term, continuous direct observations of aerosol parameters in the atmosphere outside urban and industrial areas (Charlson 1988) Indirect evidence front visibility observations indicates that the concentration of submicron

aerosols over much of the eastern part of the U S has increased during the period 1948-1978 (Husaret al, 1981)

Another example of a trend analysis of atmospheric aerosols is due to Winkler and Kaminski (1988), who concluded that submicrometer aerosol mass outside Hamburg has increased by a factor of nearly two between 1976 and 1988 due to long range transport from industrialized centres in the region

The hypothesis by Charlson et al (1987) of a connection between climate and phytoplankton activity in ocean surface waters is based on the role played by soluble aerosol particles in determining the microphysical properties of clouds The proposed climate-phytoplankton feedback rests on the facts that cloud condensation nucleus (CCN) concentrations in air are low over oceans far from land, that the CCN available in clean maritime air are composed almost totally of sulphate particles, and that this sulphur originates almost entirely from emissions of reduced sulphur gases (principally dimethylsulphide (DMS)) from the ocean surface There is a significant nonlinearity in the effect on cloud microphysics of given changes in CCN concentration, depending on the starting CCN concentration characteristics of clean oceanic air

There is abundant evidence in the literature to confirm the role played by CCN concentration in determining cloud droplet size distribution However, at this stage neither the sign nor magnitude of the proposed climate feedback can be quantitatively estimated, though preliminary calculations based on plausible scenarios indicate that this hypothesis merits careful consideration Preliminary attempts to test this hypothesis using existing historical data of various types have been inadequate and have yielded only equivocal conclusions

1.8.2 The Atmospheric Sulphur Budget

Current estimates of the global sulphur cycle show that anthropogenic emissions of SO2 are likely to be at least as large as natural emissions of volatile sulphur species, cf Table 1 5 (based essentially on Andreae, 1989) Within the industrialized regions of Europe and North America, anthropogenic emissions dominate over natural emissions by about a factor ol ten or even more (Galloway et al, 1984, Rodhe, 1976) The anthropogenic SO2 emissions have increased from less than 3 TgS per year globally in 1860, 15 in 1900, 40 in 1940 and about 80 in 1980 (Ryaboshapko 1983) It is evident from these numbers that the sulphur fluxes through the atmosphere have increased very substantially during the last century, especially in the Northern Hemisphere During the past decade the anthropogenic sulphur emissions in North America and parts of Europe have started to decline

Small amounts ol carbonyl sulphide (COS) aic also emitted into the atmosphere They do not significantly affect the sulphur balance of the troposphere but they are

Table 1 5 Estimates of Global Emission to the

Atmosphei e of Gaseous Sulphui Compounds t

Source	Annual Flux (TgS)
Anthropogenic (mainly SO2 from fossil fuel combustion)	80
Biomass burning (SO2)	7
Oceans (DMS)	40
Soils and plants (H2S, DMS)	10
Volcanoes (H2S, SO2)	10
TOTAL	147

t The uncertainty ranges are estimated to be about 30% for the anthropogenic flux and a factor of two for the natural fluxes

important in maintaining an aerosol layer in the stratosphere

Because of the limited atmospheric lifetime of most sulphur compounds, the augmentation of the sulphur concentrations brought about by industrialization is not evenly distributed around the globe This is illustrated by Figure 1 16, which shows an estimate of how much more aerosol sulphate there is at present in the lower atmosphere (900 hPa level) than in the pre-industrial situation (Langner and Rodhe 1990) Over the most polluted regions of Europe and North America the sulphate levels have gone up by more than a factor of 10 Smaller increases have occurred over large parts of the oceans

1.8.3	Aerosol Particles in the Stratosphere

The vertical profile of aerosol particle concentration normally exhibits a marked decline up through the troposphere followed by a secondary maximum in the lower stratosphere at around 20 km The stratospheric aerosol layer is maintained by an upward flux of gaseous precursors, mainly carbonyl sulphide (COS) Concentrations may be greatly enhanced over large areas for a few years following large volcanic eruptions, such as El Chichon in 1982 No significant trends have been detected in the global background aerosol layer in the stratosphere during periods of low volcanic activity (WMO, 1989a) The potential impact on climate of stratospheric aerosols is discussed in Section 2 3 2

1.8.4	Conclusions

Aerosol particles have a lifetime of at most a few weeks in the troposphere and occur in highly vanable concentrations A large proportion of the particles which influence cloud processes and for radiative balance are derived from gaseous sulphur emissions These emissions have more than doubled globally, causing a large increase in the concentration of aerosol sulphate especially over and around the industrialized regions in Europe and North America If anthropogenic sulphur emissions are indeed a major contributor to cloud condensation nuclei concentrations on a global scale, then any climate prediction must take account of future trends in regional and global anthropogenic sulphur emission, which may be quite different from those of the greenhouse gases

Aerosol particles derived from natural (biological) emissions may contribute in important ways to climate feedback processes During a few years following major volcanic eruptions the concentration of aerosol particles can be greatly enhanced

150W	100W

50W	0	50E

Longitude

100E	150E

Figure 1.16: Simulated concentration of sulphate at 900 hPa Ratio of concentrations based on total emissions (natural plus anthropogenic) divided by concentrations based on natural emissions in July (Langner and Rodhe, 1990)

References

Andreae, M O , E V Browell, M Garstang, G L Gregory, R C Harass, G F Hill, D J Jacob, M C Pereira, G W Sachse, A W Setzer, P L Silva Dias, R W Talbot, A L Torres, and S C Wofsy, 1988 Biomass burning emissions and associated haze layers over Amazonia, / Geophys Res 93 1509 1527

Andreae, M O , The global biogeochemical sulphur cycle, 1989 A review, Tiace Gases and the Biospheie B Moore (ed ), University of Arizona Press

Andronova, N , 1990 unpublished manuscript (USSR)

Angell, J K and J Korshover, 1983 Global variation in total ozone and layer mean ozone An update through 1981 I Climate Appl Meteoiol ,22, 1611-1626

Angle. R P and H F Sandhu, 1986 Rural ozone concentration in Alberta, Canada, Atmosphenc Ln\n eminent 20,1221 1228

Aselmann, I and P J Crutzen, 1989 The global distribution of natural freshwater wetlands and rice paddies, their net pi unary productivity, seasonality and possible methane emission, / Atm Chem 8, 307-358

Bacastow, R B,C D Keeling, and T P Whorl, 1985 Seasonal amplitude increase in atmospheric CCD concentration at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, 1959 1982, J Geophys Res 90 10,529-10,540

Bacastow, R B and E Maier Reimer, 1990 Climate Dynamics, in press

Baes, C F , A Bjorkstiom and P Mulholland 1985 Uptake of carbon dioxide by the oceans In J R Trabalka (ed ) Atmospheric carbon dioxide and the global carbon cycle U S Dept of Energy DOE/ER-0239, 81-111, Washington DC, USA

Barnola, J M , D Raynaud, Y S Korotkevitch, and C Lorius 1987 Vostok ice core A 160,000 year record of atmosphenc CO2. Nairne 329 408-414

Bartlet, K B , P M Crill, J A Bonassi, J E Richey and R C Harriss, 1990 Methane flux form the Amazon River floodplain emissions during rising watei I Geophys Res In press

Beardsmore DJ and G I Pearman, 1987 Atmospheric carbon dioxide measurements in the Australian region Data from surlace observatories Tellus 39B, 459 476

Bingemer, H G and P J Crutzen, 1987 The production of methane from solid wastes, / Geophys Res 92 2181-2187

Blackmer A M , and J M Bremner 1976 Potential of soil as a sink for atmosphenc mtious oxide, Geophys Res Lett 3 739 742

Blake D R , and F S Rowland, 1988 Continuing worldwide inciease in tropospheric methane, 1978 to 1987, Science 239 1129 1131

Bojkov, R D . 1988 Ozone changes at the surface and in the fiee troposphere. Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Regional and Global Ozone and its Environmental Consequences, ed by I S A Isaksen, NATO ASI Senes C 227 83-96. Reidel Dordrecht, Holland

Bolin B. (cd) 1981 Carbon Cycle Modelling. SCOPE 16 John Wiley

Bolin B 1986 How much CO2 will remain in the atmosphere ’ In The Gieenhouse Effect. Climatic Change and Ecosystems SCOPT 29. B Bolin et al . eds . 93 155. lohn Wiley

Bonsang, B M Kanakidou, G Lambert, P Monfray, 1988 The marine source of C2 Cf, aliphatic hydrocarbons, J Atmos Chem 6,3-20

Bowden, W B , and F H Bormann, 1986 Transport and loss of nitrous oxide in soil water after forest clear-cutting, Science 233 867 869

Bowden, R D , P A Steudler, J M Melillo, and J D Aber, 1990 Annual nitrous oxide fluxes from temperate forest soils in the northeastern United States, submitted to J Geophys Res

Bremner, J M,G A Breitenbeck, and A M Blackmer, 1981 Effect of nitropyrin on emission of nitrous oxide from soil fertilized with anhydrous ammonia, Geophys Res Lett, 8(4) 353-356

Broccoli, A J , and S Manabe, 1987 The influence of continental ice, atmospheric CO2, and land albedo on the climate of the last glacial maximum, Climate Dynamic s 1, 8799

Broecker W S,T H Peng, and R Engh, 1980 Modeling the cai bon system, Radioc aibon 22 565 598

Broecker, W S , and T H Peng, 1982 Tracers in the Sea, Lldnpo Picss Lamont Doherty Geological Observatory, Palisades, N Y

Burke, R A,T R Barber, and W M Sackett, 1988 Methane flux and stable hydrogen and carbon isotope composition of sedimentary methane from the Florida Everglades, Global Biot>eochem Cycles 2 329 34

Butler, J H J W Elkins, T M Thompson, and K B Egan, 1990 Tropospheric and dissolved N2O of the West Pacific and East Indian oceans during the El Nino southern oscillation event ol 1987,/ Geophys Res in press

Chappellaz, J , J M Barnola, D Raynaud, Y S Korotkevich, and C Lot ius, 1990 Ice core record of atmospheric methane over the past 160,000 years , Natme 345, 127 131

Charlson, R J , 1988 Have concentrations of tropospheric aerosols changed’ in The Chant’ins; Atmospheie. F S Rowland and I S A Isaksen (eds ), Dahlem Workshop Reports J Wiley and Sons Chichester

Charlson, R J J E Lovelock M O Andreae and S ,G Warren, 1987 Oceanic phytoplankton, atmospheric sulphur, cloud albedo and climate Natme 326,655 661

Chatfield R and H Harrison 1977 Tropospheric ozone, 2, Variations along a meridional band, / Geophys Res 82, 5969 5976

Cicerone R J 1988 How has the atmospheric concentration of CO changed’, 1 he Chant’tnt’ Atmosphei e F S Rowland and I S A Isaksen (Eds ) Wiley-Interscience, 49-61

Cicerone R J , and J D Shetter, 1981 Sources of atmospheric methane, Measurements in rice paddies and a discussion, J Geophys Res 86 7203 7209

Cicerone R J J D Shetter and C C Delwiche, 1983 Seasonal vanation ol methane flux from a California rice paddy, / Geophys Res 88 11,022 11,024

Cicerone, R and R Oremland 1988 Biogeochemical aspects of atmospheric methane. Global Btoi’eoc hem Cycles 2 299-327

Cline, J D. D P Wisegarver, and K Kelly Hansen 1987 Nitrous oxide and vertical mixing in the equatorial Pacific dunngthe 1982 1983 El Nino Deep Sea Res 34 857 873

Cohen, Y and L I Gordon 1979 Nitrous oxide production in the ocean / Geophys Res 84(C1) 347-353

Conrad, R. and W. Seiler, 1985: Influence of temperature, moisture, and organic carbon on the flux of H2 and CO between soil and atmosphere: field studies in sub-tropical regions,./ Geophvs Res , 90, 5633-5709

Conrad, R., W. Seiler, and G Bunse, 1983. Factors influencing the loss of fertilizer nitrogen into the atmosphere as N2O,./ Geophvs Res , 88, 6709-6718.

Conway, T.J , P. Tans, L.S. Waterman, K.W. Thonmg, K.A. Masarie, and R.H. Gammon, 1988: Atmospheric carbon dioxide measurements in the remote global troposphere, 19811984, Tel I us, 40B, 81-115.

Craig, J., and C. C. Chou, Methane: 1982. The record in polar ice cores, Geophys Res Lett ,9, 1221-1224.

Crill, P. M„ K. B. Bartlett, R. C Harriss, E. Gorham, E S. Verry, D. I. Sebacher, L. Madzar, and W. Sanner, 1988. Methane flux from Minnesota peatlands. Global Biogeoc hem Cscles, 2. 371384.

Crutzen, P. J , 1974: Photochemical reactions initiated by and influencing ozone in unpolluted tropospheric air, Tellus, 26, 4757

Crutzen, P. J., L. E. Heidt. J P Krasnec, W H Pollock, and W Seiler, 1979: Biomass burning as a source of atmospheric gases CO, H2, N2O, NO, CH3CI, and COS, Nattue, 282, 253256

Crutzen, P. J., A. C. Delany, J Greenberg, P Haagenson. L Heidt, R Lueb, W. Pollock, W Seiler. A Wartburg, and P Zimmerman, 1985: Tropospheric chemical composition measurements in Brazil during the dry season,./ Atmos Client. 2, 233-256.

Crutzen, P. J , I. Aselmann, and W. S Seiler, 1986 Methane production by domestic animals, wild ruminants, other herbivorous fauna, and humans, Tellus, 38B, 271-284

Crutzen, P J., 1987: Role of the tropics in atmospheric chemistry, in The Geophvsiologv of Amazonia. edited by R E. Dickinson, pp. 107-130, John Wiley, New York

Crutzen, P J., 1989: Emissions of CO2 and other trace gases to the atmosphere from fires in the tropics, 28th Liege Intel national Asti ophvsu al Colloquium, Uniseisitv de Liege, Belgium. June 26-30

Crutzen. P J., 1988' Tioposphenc ozone, an overview, Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Regional and Global Ozone and its Environmental Consequences, ed. By I.S A Isaksen, NATO ASI Senes C. 227, 3-23. Reidel Dordrecht, Holland

Danielsen. E F , 1968: Stratosphere-tropospheie exchange based on radioactivity, ozone and potential vorticity../ Atmos Sc 1 . 25,502-518.

Delany, A C , P J. Crutzen, P. Haagenson, S. Walters, and A.F. Wartburg. 1985: Photochemically produced ozone in the emissions from large-scale tropical vegetation fires, ./ Geophs s Res . 90, 2425-2429.

Delmas, R J , J.M Ascensio, and M. Legrand, 1980: Polar ice evidence that atmospheric CO2 20,000 years B P. was 50% of present, Natuie. 284, 155-157

Dignon, J. and S Hameed, 1985: A model investigation of the impact of increases in anthropogenic NOx emissions between 1967 and 1980 on tropospheric ozone, ./ Atmos Chem , 3, 491-506.

Dignon, J. and S. Hameed, 1989: Global emissions of nitrogen and suphur oxides from 1860 to 1980, J Au Pollut Conti Assoc , 39, 180-186.

Elkins, J. W„ S. C. Wofsy, M. B. McElroy, C. E. Kolb, and W A. Kaplan, 1978: Aquatic sources and sinks for nitrous oxide, Natuie, 275, 602-606.

Elkins, J. W., and R. Rossen, 1989: Summaiy Repott 1988 Geophysical Monitoung foi Climatic Change, NOAA ERL, Boulder, CO.

Elkins, J. W., B D. Hall, and J. H. Butler, 1990. Laboratory and field investigations of the emissions of nitrous oxide from biomass burning, Chapman Confei enc e on Global Biomass Binning Atmosphei ic. Climatic, and Biosphenc Implications, Williamsburgh, Virginia, USA, March 19-23, J S. Levine, Editor.

Enting, l.G. and G.l. Pearman, 1982: Descuption of a onedimensional global ccuhon cycle model. CSIRO, Division of Atmospheric Physics, Technical Paper No. 42. 95 pp, Australia.

Enting, I G , and G.L Pearman, 1987: Description of a onedimensional carbon cycle model calibrated using techniques of constrained inversion, Tellus, 39B, 459-476.

Enting, I. G., and J. V. Mansbndge, 1989' Seasonal sources and sinks of atmosphere CO? direct inversion of filtered data, Tellus, 41B, 111-126

EPA, 1989: National an pollutant emission estimates 1940 -1987 US Environment Protection Board Report EPA/450/4/88/022, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

Eppley, R.W., and B.J. Peterson, 1979: Particulate organic matter flux and planktonic new production in the deep ocean, Natuie, 282, 677-680.

Etheridge, D M , G I. Pearman, and F. de Silva, 1988' Atmospheric trace-gas variations as revealed by air trapped in an ice core from Law Dome, Antarctica, Annul Glac lologv, 10, 28-33.

Feely, R.A , R.H. Gammon, B.A. Taft. P.E. Pullen, L.E Waterman, T.J. Conway, J.F. Gendron, and D.P Wisegarver, 1987: Distribution of chemical tracers in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific during and after the 1982-1983 El-Nino/Southern Oscillation event, ./ Geophv.sua! Res , 92, 6545-6558.

Fehsenfeld. F.C , D W. Parrish, and D.W. Fahey. 1988 The measurements of NOX in the non-urban troposphere. Tropospheric Ozone Regional and Global Scale Intel actions, I. S. A. Isaksen ed., D. Reidel Publishing Co., Boston, MA, 185-217.

Feister, U., and W. Warmbt, 1987: Long-term measurements of surface ozone in the German Democratic Republic,./ Atmos Chem .5, 1-21.

Fishman. J., F.M. Vukovich, and EV. Browell. 1985 The photochemistry of synoptic-scale ozone synthesis- Implications foi the global tropospheric ozone budget, J Atmos Chem . 3. 299-320.

Fishman J C E Watson, J C Larsen, and J A Logan, 1990 The distribution ot tropospheric ozone obtained from satellite data, / Geophss Res, in press

Francev, RJ and G Farquhar, 1982 An explanation lor lk/l2C variations in tree rings, Natuie, 291, 28 31

F raser, P J MAK Khalil, R A Rasmussen, and L P Steele. 1984 Tropospheric methane in the mid-latitudes of the southern hemisphere, / Atmos Client, 1, 125 135

Fraser, PJ , and N Derek, 1989 Atmosphciic halocarbons, nitrous oxide, and methane-the GAGE program, Baseline 87 34 38, Eds B Forgan and G Ayers, Bureau ol Meteorology-CS1RO, Australia

Fraser, P J , P Hyson, R A Rasmussen, A J Ciawloid, and M A Khahil 1986a Methane, and methylchloroform in the Southern Hemisphere, / Atmos Client 4 3-42

Fraser PJ, R Rasmussen, JW Ciellield JR Fiench and MAK Khalil, 1986b Termites and global methane another assessment, / Atmospheiu Clieniistis 4 295 310

Fraser, PJ. P Hyson, S Coiam RA Rasmussen. A J Ciawlord and M A Khahil, 1986c Carbon monoxide in the Southern Hemisphere, Pi oc eedint’s of tlu Sei emit Woi Id Clean An Comp css 2 341-352

Friedli H H Loetscher, H Oeschger U Siegenthalei, and B

I a i '•y

Stauller, 1986 Ice core record of the C/ -C record of atmospheric CCD in the past two centuries, Naim e 324 237 238

Galbally. I E, 1989 Factors contiolling NOX emissions from soils L \c hani’e of Ti etc e Gases betss een Tei i esti tai Ecoss stems and the Annospheie Dahlem publications John Wiley and Sons, 23-27

Galbally I E , and C R Roy, 1980 Destiuction of ozone at the Eaith s surface, Q J Ros Meteoiol Six 106, 599 620

Galloway J N , Likens, G E , and M E Hawley, 1984 Acid deposition Natural versus anthropogenic sources, S< lenie 226 829- 831

Goodman and R J Francey, 1988	and	in

Baseline CCD, in Atmosphem Pi oip amme (Aiistiaha) 1986 Eds B W Forgan and P J Fraser, 54-58. CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia

Goudriaan J , 1989 Modelling biospheric control ol carbon fluxes between atmosphere, ocean and land in view of climatic change In A Berger et al (eds ) Climate and Geo sciences NATO ASI Series C 285, 481-499 Kluwer

Griffith DWT.WG Mankin. M T Colley DE Ward, and A Riebau 1990 FTIR lemote sensing ol biomass binning emissions of CO2 CO. CH4, CH2O. NO. NOt NH3, and NoO, Chapman Confeieiue on Global Biomass Bluntin’ Atmospheiic Climatic, and Biospheiu Implications Williamsburgh, Virginia, USA, Match 19-23, J S Levine, Editoi

Greenberg. J P , P R Zimmerman, L Heidt, and W Pollock, 1984 Hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions from biomass burning in Brazil, / Geophss Res 89 1350 1354

Hao W M SC Wofsj M B McElroy. J M Beer, and M A Togan. 1987 Sources of atmospheric nitrous oxide trom combustion J Geophss Res 92 3098-3104

Hansen, J , A Lacis, D Rind G Russell, P Stone, I Fung, R Ruedy and J Lerner 1984 Climate Sensitivity Analysis of feedback eflects In Climate Processes and Climate Sensitivity, Geophssical Monoipaph ,29, 130 163, AGU

Harriss, R C , and D I Sebacher, 1981 Methane flux in forested freshwater swamps of the southeastern United Statues, Geophss Res Lett 8 1002-1004

Harriss, R C , D 1 Sebacher and F Day, 1982 Methane flux m the Great Dismal Swamp, Natuie 297, 673-674

Harriss, R C , E Gorham, D 1 Sebacher, K B Bartlett, and P A Flebbe, 1985 Methane flux liont northern peat-lands, Natuie, 315 652 654

Harriss, R C , D 1 Sebacher. K B Bartlett, D S Bartlett, and P M Cnll, 1988 Souices ol atmospheric methane in the South Florida environment, GlobalBiot’eodtem Cycles, 2, 231-244

Heidt.LE.JP Krasnec RA Lueb, W H Pollack, B E Henry, and PJ Crutzen, 1980 Latitudinal distribution of CO and CH4 over the Pacific / Geophss Res 85, 7329-7336

Holzapfel-Pschorn A , and W Seiler, 1986 Methane emission during a cultivation penod from an Italian rice paddy J Geophss Res 91 11,803 11 814

Houghton RA 1987 Biotic changes consistent with the increased seasonal amplitude of atmospheric CO2 concentrations I Geophss Res , 92, 4223-4230

Houghton, R A , R D Boone, J M Melillo, C A Palm, G M Woodwell, N Myers, B Mooic. and D L Skole, 1985a Net flux of CO2 from tiopical forests in 1980, Natuie 316, 617 620

Houghton, R A , W H Schlesinger, S Brown, and J F Richards, 1985b Catbon dioxide exchange between the atmosphere and teriesti lai ecosystems, in Atmosplieiu Cai bon Dioside and the Global Cailwn Cscle J R Trabalka, Ed , U S Department of Eneigy, DOE/ER 0239, Washington, DC

Houghton, R A , R D Boone, J R Fruci, J E Hobbie, J M Melillo, C A Palm, B J Peteison, G R Shaver, G M Woodwell, B Moore, D L Skole, and N Myers, 1987 The flux of carbon from terrestrial ecosystems to the atmosphere in 1980 due to changes in land use Geographic distribution of the global flux Tellies 39B 122 139

Houghton, R A . G M Woodwell. R A Sedjo, R P Detwiler, CAS Hall, and S Brown, 1988 The global carbon cycle, Science 241 1736-1739

Houghton R A , and D L Skole, 1990 Changes in the global carbon cycle between 1700 and 1985, in The Eaitli Tiansfoimed bs Human Action B L Turner, ed , Cambridge Umveisity Press, in press

Houghton, R A , and G M Woodwell, 1989 Global Climatic Change, Scientific Ameiican, 260 No 4, 36 44

Husar, R B,J M Holloway, and D E Patterson, 1981 Spatial and temporal pattern of eastern U S haziness A summary, Atmos Ens 11 on , 15 1919 1928

ICF 1990 Conference organised as part of IPCC Working Group 3, Intel national Woikshop on methane emissions fi om natuial s>as ssstems coal minim; and waste manat’ement ssstems Washington DC, USA 9 13 Apnl

Isaksen I S A and O Hov 1987 Calculation of trends in the tropospheric concentration of O3, OH, CH4, and NOX, Tellus 39B 271 285

Isaksen, l.S A., O. Hov, and E. Hesstvedt, 1978' Ozone generation over rural areas, Emu on Set Technol, 12, 12791284

Jacob, D.J., and S.C. Wofsy, 1990. Budgets ot ieactive nitrogen, hydrocarbons and ozone over the Amazon forest during the wet season, J. Geophys. Res., submitted.

Keeling, C. D., and M. Heimann, 1986. Meridional eddy diffusion model of the transport of atmospheric carbon dioxide. 2. Mean annual carbon cycle,./ Geophys Res ,91,7782-7798

Keeling , C.D., R.B. Bacastow, A.F. Carter, S.C. Piper, T.P. Whorf, M. Heimann, W.G Mook, and H. Roeloffzen, 1989a. A three dimensional model of atmospheric CO2 tiansport based on observed winds: 1. Analysis of observational data in Aspects of climate variability in the Pacific and the Western Americas, D.H. Peterson (ed ), Geophysical Monogiaph , 55, AGU, Washington (USA), 165-236

Keeling , C D., S.C. Piper, and M. Heimann, 1989b’ A three dimensional model of atmospheric CO2 transport based on observed winds: 4. Mean annual gradients and mterannual variations, in: Aspects of climate variability in the Pacific and the Western Americas, D.H Peterson (ed.), Geopliy sical Monogiaph , 55, AGU, Washington (USA), 305-363

Keller, M., W. A. Kaplan, and S C. Wofsy, 1986: Emissions of N2O. CH4, and CO2 front tropical soils,./ Geophy s Res , 91, 11,791-11,802.

Khalil, M. A K., and R. A Rasmussen, 1984 Carbon monoxide in the Earth's atmosphere Increasing trend, Sc tence, 224, 5456

Khalil, M A. K., and R. A Rasmussen, 1988a. Carbon monoxide in the Earth's atmosphere. Indications of a global increase, Natme, 332. 242-245.

Khalil, M. A. K., and R. A Rasmussen. 1988b. Nitrous oxide’ Trends and global mass balance over the last 3000 years, Annul Glaciology, 10,73-79.

Kirchhoff, V.W.J.H., A W Setzer, and M.C. Pereira, 1989. Biomass burning in Amazonia. Seasonal effects on atmospheric O3 and CO, Geophys Res Lett . 16, 469-472

Kirchhoff, V. W. J H., 1990 Ozone measurements in Amazonia. Dry veisus wet season, accepted tor publication, I Geophy s Res

Kirchhoff, V W J. H. and E. V A. Marinho. 1989. A survey of continental concentrations of atmospheric CO m the Southern Hemisphere, Atmosphet tc Emu eminent, 23. 461-466.

Kohlmaier, G H , E.O Sire, A. Janecek, C D Keeling. S.C Piper, and R.Revellc, 1989’ Modelling the seasonal contribution of a CO2 lei til ization effect oi the terrestrial vegetation to the amplitude incieasc in atmosphenc CO2 at Mauna Loa Observatory, Telltis, 41B, 487-510.

Kohlmaier, G. H., 1988. The CO2 lesponse oi the biota-soil system to a luture global tempeiature change induced by CO2 and other greenhouse gases. Rogei Chapman Conference, San Diego in press.

Kvenvolden, K. A , 1988. Methane hydrates and global climate, GlobalBtogeoc hem Cvc les, 2. 221 -230

Langner, J and II Rodite, 1990 Anthiopogenic impact on the global distnbution ol atmosphenc sulphate Pioceedings ot First International Conference on Global and Regional Atmosphenc Chemistry, Beipng, China, 3-10 May 1989 L

Newman , L , W, Wang and C.S. Kiang (eds.), US Dept of Energy Report, Washington DC, In Pi ess

Lashof, D A , 1989. The dynamic greenhouse. Feedback processes that may influence future concentrations oi atmosphenc tiace gases and climate change, Climatic Change. 14,213-242.

Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1990: Influence of cloud photochemical processes on tropospheric ozone.Nairn e, 343, 227-233

Lerner, J., G. Mathews and I.Fung, 1988: Methane emissions for animals: A global high-resolution data base, Global Biogeochem Cycles, 2, 139-156.

Levy, H , II, J D Mahlman, W.J. Moxim, and S.C. Liu, 1985: Tropospheric ozone: The role of transport, ./ Geophys Res , 90, 3753-3772.

Liu, S C , D. Kley, M. McFarland, J.D. Mahlman, and H Levy, 1980’ On the origin of tropospheric ozone, J Geophys Res , 85, 7546-7552.

Logan, J. A., 1988 The ozone problem in rural areas of the United States, Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Research Workshop on regional and global ozone and its environmental consequences, cd. by I. S. A. Isaksen, NATO ASI Series C, 227, 327-344, Reidel, Dordrecht, Holland.

Logan, J. A., 1985. Tropospheric Ozone: Seasonal behavior, trends, and anthropogenic influence, J Geophys Res , 90. 10,463-10,482.

Logan, J A., M. J. Prather, S. C. Wofsy, and M B. McElroy, 1981. Tropospheric chemistry: A global perspective, J Geophys Res, 86, 7210-7254.

Logan, J.A., 1989: Ozone in rural areas of the United States,./ Geophys Res ,94,8511-8532.

Logan, J.A and V W.J.H Kirchhoff, 1986: Seasonal variations of tropospheric ozone at Natal Brazil. J Geophys Res, 91, 7875-7881.

Lowe, D. C., C A. M. Brenninkmeijer, M. R. Manning. R Sparkes, and G Wallace, 1988’ Radiocarbon determination of atmospheric methane at Baling Head, New Zealand. Natme, 332, 522-525.

Luiz.ao, F., P. Matson, G. Livingston, R. Luizao, and P Vitousek. 1990’ Nitrous oxide flux following tropical land clearing. Global Biogeochem Cycles, in press.

Luxmoore, R. J . E. G. O'Neill, J. M. Ells, H. H Rogers, 1986 Nutrient uptake and growth responses of Virginia pine to elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide,./ Enmon Qua!, 15. 244-251

Mahlman, J.D , and W J. Moxim, 1978’ Tracei simulation using a global general circulation model: Results from a mid-latitude instantaneous souice experiment, J Atmos Sci ,35, 1340-1374

Maier-Reimer, E. and K.Hasselmann, 1987: Transport and stoiage of carbon dioxide in the ocean, and in 01 game oceancirculation carbon cycle model, Climate Dynamic s, 2, 63-90

Marland, G . 1989 Fossil fuels CO? emissions. Three countlies account for 50% in 1988. CDIAC Communications, Winter 1989, 1-4, Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA

Mathews. E and I Fung. 1987 Methane emissions from natuial wetlands Global distribution, aiea and environment oi chai actei 1 sties oi sources. Global Biogeochem Cycles. 1. 61 -86

Matson, P A , and P. M. Vitousek, 1987. Cross-system comparisons ot soil nitrogen transformations and nitrous oxide flux in tropical forest ecosystems. Global Bio^eoihem Cm les 1, 163-170.

Matson, P. A , and P. M. Vitousek, 1989 Ecosystem approaches for the development of a global nitrous oxide budget. Bioscience, in press.

Mayewsky, P.A., W. B. Lyons, M. Twickler, W. Dansgaard, B. Koci, C. I. Davidson, and R. E. Honrath, 1986' Sulfate and nitrate concentrations from a South Greenland ice core. Science 232, 975-977.

McElroy, M. B , and S C. Wofsy, 1986' Tropical forests: Interactions with the atmosphere, Tioptial Ram Foiests and the Wot Id Atmospheie, AAAS Selected symposium 101, edited by Prance, G. 1 , pp. 33-60, Westview Picss, Inc . Boulder, CO.

Moore, T. R., and R. Knowles. 1987 Methane and carbon dioxide evolution from subarctic tens. Can J Sod St i , 67, 7781

Mu/.io, L J , and J. C. Kramltch, 1988' An artifact in the measurement of N?O from combustion sources, Geophys Res Lett ,15(12), 1369-1372.

Neftel, A H. Oeschger, J. Schwander, B. Stauffer, and R Zumbrunn, 1982. Ice core measurements give atmospheric COn content during the past 40,000 years. Natuie, 295, 222223.

Neftel, A , E Moor, H. Oeschger, and B. Stauffer, 1985a: Evidence lrom polar ice cores for the increase in atmospheric COt in the past two centuries, Natuie, 315, 45-47

Neftel, A J. Beer, H. Oeschger, F. Zurcher, and R C Finkel, 1985b Sulfate and nitrate concentrations in snow from South Greenland 1895-1978, Nairn e. 314, 611 -613.

Neftel. A.. H. Oeschger, T. Staffelbach and B. Stauffer, 1988: COt record in the Byrd ice core 50,000-5,000 years BP, Natuie. 331,609-611.

Newell, R E., H. G. Reichle, and W Seiler, 1989' Carbon monoxide and the burning Earth, Scientific. Ameiican, Octobei 1989. 82-88.

Neue, H H . and H W. Scharpenseel. 1984. Gaseous products of decomposition of oigamc matter in submerged soils, hit Rice Res Inst . Oitpinic Mattei and Rue, 311-328, Los Banos. Plnllipines

Nisbet. E.G.. 1989. Some Northern sources of atmospheric methane production, history and future implications. Can .1 Ecu th Sc i ,26. 1603-1611.

Oeschger, H , U Siegcnthaler, U. Schottcrci, and A Gugelmann, 1975- A box diffusion model to study the carbon dioxide exchange in nature, Tellus, 27, 168-192.

Oltmans. S.J., and W.D. Kohmyr, 1986: surface ozone distributions and variations from 1973-1984 measurements at the NOAA Geophysical Monitoring for Climate Change baselines observatories,./ Geophys Res .91,5229-5236.

Oltmans, S.J., W.D. Kohmyr, P.R. Fianchois, and W.A. Matthews. 1988: Tiopospheric ozone Variations lrom surface and ECC ozonesonde observations, in Proc. 1988 Quadrennial Ozone Symposium, ed R.D Bojkov and P Fabian, A Deepak Publ . Hampton. VA, USA.

Pearman, G. I , and P. Hyson, 1981. The annual variation of atmospheric CO2 concentration observed in the northern hemisphere../ Geophss Res . 86. 9839-9843.

Pearman, G. I , P Hyson and P J Fraser, 1983: The global distribution of atmospheric.carbon dioxide, 1, Aspects of Observation and Modelling.,/ Geophys Res, 88, 3581-3590.

Pearman, G I., and P. Hyson, 1986. Global transport and interreservoir exchange of carbon dioxide with particular reference to stable isotopic distnbutions,./ Atmos Cheni , 4, 81-124.

Pearman. G. I., and P. J Fraser. 1988: Sources of increased methane. Natm e, 332, 489-490

Pearman, G 1 , D Etheridge. F. de Silva, P.J. Fraser, 1986: Evidence of changing concentrations of atmospheric CO2, N2O, and CH4 fiom air bubbles in Antarctic ice, Natuie, 320, 248-250.

Peng, T.-H., and W. S. Broecker. 1985: The utility of multiple tracer distributions in calibrating models for uptake of anthropogenic CO2 by the ocean thermocline, J Geophys Res , 90, 7023-7035.

Penkett. S.A . 1982: Non-methane organics in the remote troposphere In E.D. Goldberg (ed.) Atmospheric Chemistry ,329-355 Dahlem publications, Spiinger Verlag, Berlin.

Penkett, S. A., B M R. Jones, M. J. Rycroft, and D. A. Simmons, 1985 An interhemispheric comparison of the concentration of bromine compounds in the atmosphere, Natuie, 318, 550-553

Pierotti. D., and R A. Rasmussen, 1976: Combustion as a source of nitrous oxide m the atmosphere, Geophys Res Lett . 3. 265267

Prinn, R , D Cunnold, R Rasmussen, P Simmonds, F. Alyea, A. Crawlord, P Fraser, and R. Rosen. 1987: Atmospheric trends in methylchloroform and the global average for the hydroxyl radical, Sc lenc e, 238, 945-950.

Prinn, R., D. Cunnold. R Rasmussen, P. Simmonds, F. Alyea. A. Crawford, P Fraser, and R Rosen, 1990: Atmospheric trends and emissions of nitrous oxide deducted from ten years of ALE-GAGE data, submitted to .1 Geophys Res

Quay, P. D , S. L. King, J. M Landsdown, and D. O. Wilbur, 1990. Methane release lrom biomass burning: estimates derived from 1 C composition of atmospheric methane, Chapman Confeienie on Global Biomass Bmninf’ Atmospheiic, Climatic, and Biospheric Implications, Williamsburgh, Virginia. USA. March 19-23, J. S. Levine, Editor.

Rasmussen, R. A, and MAK Khalil, 1981. Atmospheric methane (CH4): Trends and seasonal cycles, J Geophys Res, 86, 9826-9832.

Rasmussen, R. A., and M. A. K. Khalil, 1983: Global production of methane by termites, Natuie. 301, 700-702.

Rasmussen. R. A., and M. A. K. Khalil, 1984: Atmospheric methane in the recent and ancient atmospheres: Concentrations, trends, and inter-hemispheric gradient, ./ Geophss Res. 89, 11,599-11,605

Rasmussen, R A , and M. A. K Khalil, 1986: Atmospheric trace gases Trends and distributions over the last decade, ,S< lence, 232, 1623-1624.

Rasmussen. R A., and M A K. Khalil, 1988. Isoprene over the Amazon basin. / Geophss Res ,93, 1417-1421.

Raynaud, D , and J M Barnola, 1985 An Antarctic ice core reveals atmospheric CO2 variations over the past few centuries, Natme 315,309 311

Raynaud, D , J Chappellaz, J M Barnola, Y S Korotkevich, and C Lonus,1988 Climatic and CH4 cycle implications of glacial-interglacial CH4 change in the Vostok ice core, Native, 333 655 657

Rinsland, C P,J S Levine, and T Miles, 1985 Concentration of methane in the troposphere deduced from 1951 infrared solar spectra, Natme, 330, 245-249

Robertson, G P , and J M Tiedje, 1988 Deforestation alters denitrification in a lowland tropical rain forest, Natme 336 756-759

Robinson, E , B A Bodhaine, W D Komhyr, S J Oltmans, L P Steele, P Tans, and T M Thompson, 1988 Long-term air quality monitoring at the South Pole by the NOAA program Geophysical Monitoring lor Climatic Change, Res Geopln s 26 63 80

Rodhe, H , 1976 An atmospheric sulphur budget for NW Europe, in Nttiot’en, Phosphoi us and Sulphur Global Cycles B H Svensson and R Soderlund (eds ) SCOPE Report 7. Ecol Bull (Stockholm) 22 123 134

Ronen, D , M Mordeckai, and E Almon, 1988 Contaminated aquifers are a forgotten component of the global N?O budget, Natme 335 57-59

Rotty, R M , and G Marland, 1986 Production ot CO2 from fossil fuel burning by fuel type. 1860-1982 Repent NDP 006 Carbon Dioxide Information Center Oak Ridge National Laboratory ,USA

Ryaboshapko, A G , 1983 The atmospheric sulphur cycle In The Global Biogeochemical Sulphm Cycle MV Is alien and GR Fieney (eds) SCOPE 19 203-296, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, New York

Ryden, J C , 1981 N2O exchange between a grassland soil and the atmosphere, Nairn e 292 235 237

Sarmiento, JL, JC Ori, and U Siegenthaler 1990 A perturbation simulation of CO2 uptake in an ocean general circulation model Submitted to / Geopln s Res

Sebacher, D 1 , R C Harass, K B Bartlett S M Sebacher. and

S S Grice, 1986 Atmospheric methane sources Alaskan tundra bogs, an alpine fen and a subarctic boreal marsh Tellus 38B 1-10

Schmidt, J W Seiler, and R Conrad, 1988 Emission of nitrous oxide from temperate lores! soils into the atmospheie / Atm Client 6 95-115

Seiler, W and J Fishman, 1981 The distribution of carbon monoxide and ozone in the free troposphere / Geopln s Res 86, 7255 7265

Seiler, W , R Conrad, and D Scharffe, 1984 Field studies ot methane emission from termite nests into the atmosphere and measurements of methane uptake by tropical sods, / Atmos Chem 1 171-186

Seiler, W , and R Conrad, 1987 Contribution ot tropical ecosystems to the global budget of trace gases especially CH4, H2, CO and N2O, The Geopln stoloi’y of Amcronia Id R Dickinson 111-160 John Wiley, New York

Siegenthaler U , 1983 Uptake of excess CCD b\ an oulctop diffusion model of the ocean / Geopins Res 88 3599-3608

Siegenthaler, U , 1986 Carbon dioxide its natural cycle and anthropogenic perturbations In The Role 0/Au Sea Esc hamte m Geochemical Cyc hili’ (P Buat-Menard, ed ), 209-247, Reidel Siegenthaler, U , and H Oeschger, 1987 Biospheric CO2 emissions during the past 200 years reconstructed by deconvolution of ice core data, Tellus, 39B 140 154

Siegenthaler, U , H Fnedh, H Loetscher, E Moor, A Neftel, H Oeschger, and B Stauffer, 1988 Stable-isotope ratios and concentrations of CO2 in air from polar ice cores, Annals oj Glaciology 10

Slemr, F, R Conrad, and W Seiler, 1984 Nitrous oxide emissions from fertilized and unfertilized soils in a subtropical region (Andalusia, Spam), / Atmos Chem ,1 159 169

Stauffer , B , H Hofer, H Oeschger, J Schwander, and U Siegenthaler, 1984 Atmospheric CO2 concentrations during the last glaciation, Annals of Glac ioloc>y 5 760 764

Stauffer, B , G Fischer, A Neftel, and H Oeschger, 1985 Increases in atmospheric methane recorded in Antarctic ice core, Science 229 1386-1388

Stauffer, B , E Lochbronner, H Oeschger, and J Schwander, 1988 Methane concentration in the glacial atmosphere was only half that of the preindustrial Holocene, Natme 332 812 814

Steele, L P , P J Fraser, R A Rasmussen, MAK Khalil, T J Conway, A J Crawford, R H Gammon, K A Masarie, and K W Thomng, 1987 The global distribution of methane in the troposphere, J Atmos Chem 5 125-171

Stevens, C M,A E Engelkemeir, R A Rasmussen, 1990 The contribution of increasing fluxes ot CH4 from biomass burning in the southern hemisphere based on measurements of the temporal trends of the isotopic composition of atmospheric CH4, Chapman Con/eience on Global Biomass Buinini’ Atmosphenc Climatic and Biosphenc Implications Williamsburgh, Virginia, USA, March 19 23, J S Levine, Editor

Strain, B R, and J D Cure, eds, 1985 Dnect Effect on Incieastnt’ Caibem Diowle on Vegetation DOE/ER-0238 U S Department of Energy, Washington, DC

Stuiver, M and P D Quay, 1981 Atmospheric changes resulting from fossil fuel CO2 release and cosmic ray tlux variability, Ecu th Planet Set Lett S3 34^-362

Sundquist. ET, 1985 Geological perspectives on caibon dioxide and the carbon cycle, in The Carbon Cycle and Atmospheric CCb Natural Variations Archean to Present, E T Sundquist and W S Broecker (eds ), Geop/n sic al Monotpaph 32, 5 60, AGU

Svensson, B H , and T Rosswall, 1984 In situ methane production from acid peat in plant communities with different moisture regimes in a subarctic mire, Oikos 43 341 350

Sze, N D.1977 Anthropogenic CO emissions Implications for the atmospheric CO-OH CH4 cycle Science 195 673 675

Tans P P , T J Conway and T Nakasawa. 1989 Latitudinal distnbulion ot sources and sinks ot atmosphenc carbon dioxide I Geopln s Res. 94 5151 5172

Thompson A M , and R J Cicerone, 1986 Possible peilurbations to atmospheric CO, CH4,-and OH, / Geophys Re\ 91 10,853 10,864

Thompson, AM, RW Stewart, M A Owens and J A Herwehc, 1989 Sensitivity ol tropospheric oxidants to global chemical and climate change, Atmos Emu on , 23, 519 532

Thompson, M L,1 G Enting, G I Pearman and P Hyson, 1986 Interannual variation of atmospheric CO2 concentration, J Atmos Client 4 125 155

Tiao G C G C Reinsei, J H Pedrick, G M Allenby, C L Matcer, A J Miller, and J J DeLmsi, 1986 A statistical trend analysis ol ozonesonde data / Gcophyy Res 91 133121-13136

Trabalka, J R (ed ), 1985 Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide and the Global Carbon Cycle, US Department oj Energy DOEIER 0239, Washington D C

UNEP 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer UNEP conlcrence services number 87 6106

UNEP 1989 Report of the Technology Review Panel, ICN number 92-807 1247-0

Volz A and D Kley, 1988 Ozone measurements made in the 19th century An evaluation of the Montsouris series Natiue 332 240-242

Wagenbach D K O Munnich, U Schotterer, and II Oeschger,

1988	The anthropogenic impact on snow chemistry at Colle Gnifctti Swiss Alps, Ami Glacial 10 183-187

Wahlen, M N Takata, R Henry, B Deck, J Zeglen, J S Vogel J Southon, A Shemesh, R Fairbanks, and W Broecker, 1989 Carbon-14 in methane sources and in atmospheric methane The contribution from fossil carbon, Science 245 286-290

Weiss, R F 1981 The temporal and spatial distribution of tropospheric nitrous oxide, I Geophys Res, 86(C8), 7185-7195

Weiss R F and H Craig, 1976 Production of atmospheric nitrous oxide by combustion, Geophys Res Lett, 3(12) 751-753

Wenk, T , 1985 Einflusse der Ozeanzirkulation und der mannen biologic aul die atmosphartsche CCb-konzentration, Ph D thesis, University ot Bern, Switzerland

Whalen S C,andW S Rceburgh, 1988 A methane flux time series lor tundra environments, Global Biogeochem Cycles, 2, 399-410

Winkler, P and U Kaminski, 1988 Increasing submicron particle mass concentration at Hamburg, 1 Observations, Atmos Em a on 22 2871-2878

Winstead, E L , K G Hoffman, W R Coffer III, and J. S. Levine, 1990 Nitrous oxide emissions from biomass burning, Chapman Conjiience on Global Biomass Binning Atmosphc > ic Climatic and Biosphenc Implications, Wilhamsburgh, Virginia, USA, March 19 23, J S Levine, Editor

WMO 1985 Atmospheric ozone 1985 Assessment of our understanding ol the processes controlling its present distribution and change Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project report 16 Geneva

WMO 1989a Report ol the NASA/WMO Ozone Trends Panel,

1989	Global Ozone Rcseaich and Monitoring Project, Report 18 Geneva

WMO, 1989b Scientific assessment of stratospheric ozone 1989, Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project, Report 20, Geneva

Wofsy, S C, M B McElroy, and Y L Yung, 1975 The chemistry of atmospheric ozone, Geophys Re\ Lett 2 215-218

Woodwell, G M 1983 Biotic effects on the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide A review and projection, Changing Climate National Academy Press, 216-241

Yagi, K , and K Minami 1990 Effects of mineral fertilizer and organic matter application on the emission of methane from some Japanese paddy fields, submitted to Sod Sc 1 Plant Nitti

Zander R , Ph Demoulm D H Ehhalt, and U Schmidt, 1990 Secular increases of the vertical abundance of methane derived from 1R solar spectra recorded at the Jungfraujoch Station, J Geophys Res in press

Zander, R, Ph Demoulm D H Ehhalt, U Schmidt, and CP Rinsland, 1989 Secular increases in the total vertical abundance of carbon monoxide above central Europe since 1950,7 Geophys Res 94 11,021-11,028

Zardini, D , D Raynaud, D Scharffe, and W Seiler, 1989 N2O measurements of air extracted from Antarctic ice cores Implications on atmospheric N2O back to the last glacial-interglacial transition, J Atmos Client ,8 189-201

Zimmerman, P R , J P Greenberg, S O Wandiga, and P J Crutzen, Termites 1982 A potentially large source of atmospheric methane, carbon dioxide and molecular hydrogen, Science, 218, 563-565

2

Radiative Forcing of Climate

K.P. SHINE, R.G. DERWENT, D.J. WUEBBLES, J-J. MORCRETTE

Contributors:

A.J. Apling; J.P. Blanchet; R.J. Charlson; D. Crommelynck; H. Grassl; N. Husson;

G.J. Jenkins; I. Karol; M.D. King; V. Ramanathan; H. Rodhe; G-Y. Shi; G. Thomas; W-C. Wang; T.M.L. Wigley; T. Yamanouchi

CONTENTS

Executive Summary

2.1	Introduction

2.2	Greenhouse Gases

2.2.1	Introduction

2.2.2	Direct Effects

2.2.3	Indirect Effects

2.2.4	Relationship Between Radiative Forcing and Concentration

2.2.5	Past and Present Changes in Radiative Forcing

2.2.6	Calculations of Future Forcing

2.2.7	A Global Warming Potential Concept for Trace Gases

45

47

47

47

49

50

51

54

55

58

2.3	Other Radiative Forcing Agents	61

2.3.1	Solar Radiation	61

2.3.1.1	Variability due to orbital changes	61

2.3.1.2	Variability due to changes total in solar

irradiance	61

2.3.2	Direct Aerosol Effects	63

2.3.3	Indirect Aerosol Effects	64

2.3.4	Surface Characteristics	65

2.4	The Relative Importance of Radiative Forcing

Agents in the Future	66

References	67

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1	The climate of the Earth is affected by changes in radiative forcing due to several sources (known as radiative forcing agents) these include the concentrations of radiatively active (greenhouse) gases, solar radiation, aerosols and albedo In addition to their direct radiative effect on climate, many gases produce indirect effects on global radiative forcing

2	The major contributor to increases in iadiative forcing due to increased concentrations of greenhouse gases since pre industrial times is carbon dioxide (CO2) (6191) with substantial contributions from methane (CH4) (17%) nitrous oxide (N2O) (4%) and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) (12%) Stratospheric water vapour increases, which are expected to result from methane emissions, contribute 6%, although evidence for changes in concentration is based entirely on model calculations

The contribution from changes in tropospheric and stratospheric ozone is difficult to estimate, increased levels oi tropospheric ozone may have caused 10% of the total forcing since pre industrial times Decreases in lower stratospheric ozone may have decreased radiative forcing in recent decades

3	The most recent decadal increase in radiative forcing is attributable to CO2 (56%), CH4 (11%), N2O (6%) and CFCs(24%), stratospheric H2O is estimated to have contributed 4%

4	Using the scenario A ("business-as-usual case) of future emissions derived by IPCC WG3, calculations show the following forcing from pre industrial values (and percentage contribution to total) by the year 2025

CO2 2 9Wm‘2(63%), CH4 0 7Wm2(15%), N2O 0 2 Wm 2 (4%), CFCs and HCFCs 0 5 Wm 2 (11%), stratospheric H2O 0 2Wm 2 (5%)

The total, 4 6 Wm 2 corresponds to an effective CCb amount of more than double the pre-industnal value

5	An index is developed which allows the c li mate effects of the emission', of greenhouse gases to be compaied This is termed the Global Warming Potential (GWP) The GWP depends on the position and strength of the absorption bands ol the gas its lifetime in the atmosphcie its moleculai weight and the time period over which the climate eflects are ol concern A number of simplifications arc used to derive values for GWPs and the values presented lieie should be considered as pieliminaiy It is quoted here as 1 cl itive to CO2

Over a 500 year time period, the GWP of equal mass emissions of the gases is as follows

CO2 1, CH4 9, 2O 190, CFC 11 1500, CFC-12 4500, HCFC-22 510

Over a 20 year time period, the corresponding figures are

CO2 1, CH4 63, N2O 270, CFC-11 4500, CFC 12 7100, HCFC-22 4100

Values for other gases are given in the text There are many uncertainties associated with this analysis, for example the atmospheric lifetime of CO2 is not well characterized The GWPs can be applied by considering actual emissions of the greenhouse gases For example, considering anthropogenic emissions of all gases in 1990, and integrating their effect over 100 years, shows that 60% of the greenhouse forcing from these emissions comes from CO2

6	Although potential CFC replacements are less (01, in some cases, not at all) damaging to the ozone layer, the GWPs of several of them are still substantial, however, over periods greater than about 20 years most of the substitutes should have a markedly smaller impact on global wanning than the CFCs they replace, assuming the same emissions

7	Changes in climate forcing over the last century due to greenhouse gas increases are likely to have been much gieater than that due to solar radiation Although decadal variations of solar radiation can be comparable with greenhouse forcing, the solar forcing is not sustained and oscillates m sign This limits the ability of the climate system to respond to the forcing In contrast, the enhanced greenhouse effect causes a sustained forcing

8	Stratospheric aerosols resulting from volcanic eiuptions can cause a significant radiative forcing A large eruption such as El Chichon can cause a radiative forcing, averaged over a decade about one third of (but the opposite sign to) the greenhouse gas forcing between 1980 and 1990 Regional and short teim elfects of volcanic eiuptions can be even larger

9	Man made sulphur emissions which have increased in the Noithein Hemisphere ovei the last century affect iadiative foicing by loiming aerosols and influencing the radiative pioperties of clouds so as to cool the Earth It is very difficult to

estimate the size of this effect, but it is conceivable that this radiative forcing has been of a comparable magnitude, but of opposite sign, to the greenhouse forcing earlier in this century; regional effects could even have been larger. The change in

forcing due to sulphur emissions in the future could be of either sign, as it is not known whether the emissions will increase or decrease.

2.1	Introduction

The climate of the Earth has the potential to be changed on all timescales by the way in which shortwave radiation from the Sun is scattered and absorbed, and thermal infrared radiation is absorbed and emitted by the Earthatmosphere system If the climate system is in equilibrium, then the absorbed solar energy is exactly balanced by radiation emitted to space by the Earth and atmosphere Any factor that is able to perturb this balance, and thus potentially alter the climate, is called a radiative forcing agent

Of particular relevance to concerns about climate change are the changes in radiative forcing which arise from the increases in the concentration of radiatively active trace gases ( greenhouse gases ) in the troposphere and stratosphere described in Section 1 These changes in concentration will come about when their emissions or removal mechanisms are changed so that the atmospheric concentrations are no longer in equilibrium with the sources and sinks of the gas The growing concentrations of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, methane chlorofluorocarbons and nitrous oxide are of particular concern In addition, indirect effects on radiative forcing can result from molecules that may not themselves be greenhouse gases but which lead to chemical reactions which create greenhouse gases Foi example, indirect effects are believed to be altering the distribution of stratospheric and tropospheric ozone

Although water vapour is the single most important greenhouse gas the effect of changes in its tropospheric concentration (which may arise as a natural consequence of the warming) is considered as a feedback to be treated in climate models, similarly changes in cloud amount or properties which result from climate changes will be considered as feedbacks Both these factors are discussed in Section 3 Possible feedbacks between ocean temperature and dimethyl sulphide emissions, which may alter sulphate aerosol amounts, are also considered to be a feedback and will be considered in Section 3

Other factors can alter the radiative balance of the planet The most obvious of these is the amount oi solar radiation reaching the Earth and this is known to vary on a wide range of time scales The amount of solar radiation absorbed by the Earth atmosphere system is detei mined by the extent to which the atmosphere and Earths surface reflect the radiation (their albedo) and by the quantities of gases such as ozone and water vapour in the atmosphere The albedo of the Earth's surface can be affected by changes in the land surface, e g , desertification The planetary albedo can be altered by changes in the amount of aerosol particles in the atmosphere, in the stratosphcie the dominant source is from volcanic eruptions, while in the troposphere the source can be either natural or man-made

The planetary albedo will also change if the properties of clouds are changed, for instance, if additional cloud condensation nuclei are provided by natural or man-made changes in aerosol concentrations Changes in aerosol concentrations can also affect radiative forcing by their ability to absorb thermal infrared radiation

Although all of the above factors will be considered in this section, the emphasis will be very strongly on the greenhouse gases, as they are likely to change radiative forcing over the next few decades by more than any other factor, natural or anthropogenic They are also candidates for any policy action which may be required to limit global climate change Obviously factors such as those related to emissions from volcanoes and the effects of solar variability are completely outside our control

The purpose ol this section is to use the information described in Section 1, on how the forcing agents themselves have changed in the past and how, based on a number of emission scenarios, they may change in the future This information will then be used in climate models, later in the report, to show the climate and sea level consequences of the emission scenarios

However, we can also use the estimates of radiative forcing from this section in their own right, by looking at the relative contribution from each of the agents - and in particular the greenhouse gases The advantage of dealing with radiative forcing, rather than climate change itself, is that wc can estimate the former with a great deal more certainty than we can estimate the latter In the context of policy formulation, the relative importance of these agents is of major significance in assessing the effectiveness of response strategies The radiative forcing is expressed as a change in flux of energy in Wm“-

In order to formulate policy on the possible limitations of greenhouse gas emissions (undertaken within IPCC by Working Group III), it is essential to know how abatement of the emissions of each of the trace gases will affect global climate forcing in the future This information can then be used for calculations of the cost-effectiveness of reductions, e g CC>2 emissions compared to CH4 emissions There is no ideal index that can be used for each gas, but values of one index, the Global Warming Potential, are derived in this section Research now under way will enable such indices to be refined

2.2	Greenhouse Gases

2.2.1	Introduction

A typical global-average energy budget for the climate system shows that about half of the incident solar radiation (at wavelengths between 0 2 and 4 0 pm) is absorbed at the Earth s surface This radiation warms the Earth s surface which then emits energy in the thermal infrared region (4-

100pm), constituents in the Earths atmosphere arc able to absoib this radiation and subsequently emit it both upwards to space and downwards to the suriace This downward emission of radiation serves to further warm the suiface, this warming is known as the greenhouse effect

The strength of the greenhouse effect can be gauged by the difference between the effective emitting temperature of the Earth as seen from space (about 255K) and the globally-averaged suriace temperature (about 285K) The principal components of the greenhouse effect are the atmospheric gases (Section 2 2 2), clouds and aerosols also absorb and emit thermal infrared radiation but they also mcicasc the planetary albedo, and it is believed that then net effect is to cool the surface (sec Sections 3 3 4 and 2 3 2) 01 the atmospheric gases the dominant greenhouse gas is water vapour If H2O was the only greenhouse gas piesent then the greenhouse clfect of a clear sky nnd-latitudc atmosphere, as measured by the diffcience between the emitted thermal infrared flux at the surface and the top oi the atmosphere, would be about 60 70% of the value with all gases included, by contrast, it CO2 alone was present the corresponding value would be about 25% (but note that because ol overlap between the absorption bands of different gases, such percentages are not strictly additive)

Here we are pnmai lly concerned with the impacts of changing concentrations oi greenhouse gases A number of basic factors aflcct the ability of different greenhouse gases to foice the climate system

The absorption strength and the wavelength of this absorption in the thermal infrared are of fundamental lmpoi lance in dictating whether a molecule can be an important gieenhouse forcing agent, this effect is modified by both the existing quantities of that gas in the atmosphere and the oveilap between the absorption bands and those of othei gases present in the atmosphere

The ability to build up significant quantities of the gas in the atmosphere is of obvious importance and this is dictated not only by the emissions of the gas, but also by its lifetime in the atmosphere Fuilhei, these gases, as well as those that aie not significant greenhouse gases can, via chemical reactions result in products that are greenhouse gases

In addition the relative strength of greenhouse gases will depend on the period over which the effects of the gases are to be considered For example, a short lived gas which has a stiong (on a kg-pei-kg basis) greenhouse effect may, in the short term be more effective at changing the radiative forcing than a weaker but longer-lived gas, over longei penods however the integrated eflect of the weaker gas may be greater as a result of its persistence in the atmosphcie

Fiom this intioduction it is clear that an assessment of the stiength of greenhouse gases in influencing radiative

forcing depends on how that strength is measured There are many possible appioaches and it is important to distinguish between them

Some of the more important indices that have been used as measures of the strength of the radiative forcing by greenhouse gases include

1) Relative molecular forcing. This gives the relative forcing on a molecule-per-molecule basis of the different species It is normally quoted relative to CO2 Since the forcing of some atmospheric species (most notably CCh, methane and nitrous oxide) is markedly non-linear in absorber amount, this relative forcing will be dependent on the concentration changes tor which the calculations are performed A small change in current atmospheric concentrations is generally used This measure emphasises that the contributions of individual gases must not be judged on the basis of concentration alone The relative molecular forcing will be considered in Section 2 2 4

II)	Relative mass forcing. This is similar to the relative molecular forcing but is relative on a kilogram per kilogram basis It is related to the relative molecular forcing by the molecular weights of the gases concerned It will also be considered in Section 2 2 4

III)	Contribution of past, present and future changes in trace gas concentration. This measure, which can either be relative or absolute calculates the contribution to radiative forcing over some given period due to observed past or present changes, or scenarios of future changes in trace gas concentration This is an important baseline The relative measures (1) and (11) above, can belittle the influence of carbon dioxide since it is relatively weak on a molecule-per-molecule basis, or a kg-per-kg basis This measure accounts for the fact that the concentration changes for CO2 aie between two and four orders of magnitude greater than the changes of other important greenhouse gases This measure will be considered in sections 2 2 5 and 2 2 6 Care must be taken in interpreting this measure as it is sometimes presented as the total change in forcing since pre industrial times and sometimes as the change in forcing over a shorter period such as a decade or 50 years

iv) Global Warming Potential (GWP). All the above measures are based on concent/ation changes in the atmosphere, as opposed to emissions Assessing the potential impact of future emissions may be far more important from a policy point of view Such measures combine calculations of the absorption strength of a molecule with assessments of its atmospheric lifetime, it can also include the indirect greenhouse effects due to chemical changes in the

atmosphere caused by the gas The development of an index is still at an early stage, but progress has been made and preliminary values are given in Section 2 2 7

A detailed assessment of the climatic effects of trace gases was made by WMO (1985) (see also Ramanathan et al, 1987) The effect of halocarbons has been considered in detail in the recent Scientific Assessment of Stratospheric Ozone (UNEP, 1989) (see also Fisher et al, 1990) This section should be considered as building on these assessments and bringing them up to date

2.2.2	Direct Effects

Many molecules in the atmosphere possess pure-rotation or vibration-rotation spectra that allow them to emit and absorb thermal infrared radiation (4-100 pm), such gases include water vapour, carbon dioxide and ozone (but not the mam constituents of the atmosphere, oxygen or nitrogen) These absorption properties are directly responsible for the greenhouse effect

It is not the change in thermal infrared flux at the surface that determines the strength of the greenhouse warming The surface, planetary boundary layer and the free troposphere are tightly coupled via air motions on a wide range of scales so that in a global-mean sense they must be considered as a single thermodynamic system As a result it is the change in the radiative flux at the ti opopause, and not the surface, that expresses the radiative forcing of climate system (see e g , Ramanathan et al 1987)

A number of factors determine the ability of an added molecule to affect radiative forcing and in particular the spectral absorption of the molecule in relation to the spectral distribution of radiation emitted by a black-body The distribution of emitted radiation with wavelength is shown by the dashed curves for a range of atmospheric temperatures in Figure 2 1 Unless a molecule possesses strong absorption bands in the wavelength region of significant emission, it can have little effect on the net radiation

These considerations are complicated by the effect of naturally occurring gases on the spectrum of net radiation at the tropopause Figure 2 1 shows the spectral variation of the net flux at the tropopause for a clear-sky mid-latitude profile For example, the natural quantities of carbon dioxide are so large that the atmosphere is very opaque over short distances at the centre of its 15 pm band At this wavelength the radiation reaching the tropopause, from both above and below, comes from regions at temperatures little different to the tropopause itself The net flux is thus close to zero The addition of a small amount of gas capable of absoibing at this wavelength has negligible effect on the net flux at the tropopause The effect of added carbon dioxide molecules is, however, significant at the

Figure 2.1: The dashed lines show the emission from a black body (Wm 2 per 10 cm 1 spectral interval) across the thermal infrared for temperatures of 294K, 244K and 194K The solid line shows the net flux at the tropopause (Wm 2) in each 10 cm 1 interval using a standard narrow band radiation scheme and a clear-sky mid-latitude summer atmosphere with a surface temperature of 294K (Shine, pers comm ) In general, the closer this line is to the dashed line for 294K, the more transparent the atmosphere

edges of the 15 pm band, and in particular around 13 7 and 16 pm At the other extreme, in more transparent regions of the atmosphere (for example between 10 and 12 pm), much of the radiation reaching the tropopause from beneath is, for clear skies, from the warm surface and the lower troposphere, this emission is not balanced by downward emission of radiation from the overlying stratosphere A molecule able to absorb in such a transparent spectral region is able to have a far larger effect

The existing concentrations of a particular gas dictate the effect that additional molecules of that gas can have For gases such as the halocarbons, where the naturally occurring concentrations are zero or very small, their forcing is close to linear in concentration for present-day concentrations Gases such as methane and nitrous oxide are present in such quantities that significant absorption is already occurring and it is found that their forcing is approximately proportional to the square root of their concentration Furthermore, there is significant overlap between some of the infrared absorption bands of methane and nitrous oxide which must be carefully considered in calculations of forcing For carbon dioxide, as has already been mentioned, parts of the spectrum are already so opaque that additional molecules of carbon dioxide are even less effective, the forcing is found to be logarithmic in concentration These effects are reflected in the empirical expressions used to calculate the radiative forcing that are discussed in Section 2 2 4

A further consideration is the spectroscopic strength of the bands of molecules which dictates the strength ol the infra-red absorption. Molecules such as the halocarbons have bands with intensities about an order of magnitude or more greater, on a molecule-per-molecule basis, than the 15 pm band of carbon dioxide The actual absorptance by a band is, however, a complicated function of both absorber amount and spectroscopic strength so that these factors cannot be considered entirely in isolation,

2.2.3	Indirect Effects

In addition to their direct radiative effects, many of the greenhouse gases also have indirect radiative clfccts on climate through their interactions with atmospheric chemical processes Several of these interactions are shown in Table 2.1

For example, both atmospheric measurements and theoretical models indicate that the global distribution of ozone in the troposphere and stratosphere is changing as a result of such interactions (UNEP, 1989, also see Section 1)

Ozone plays an important dual role tn affecting climate While CO2 and other greenhouse gases are relatively well-

mixed in the atmosphere, the climatic effect of ozone depends strongly on its vertical distribution throughout the troposphere and stratosphere, as well as on its total amount in the atmosphere Ozone is a primary absorber of solar radiation in the stratosphere where it is dnectly responsible for the increase in temperature with altitude. Ozone is also an important absorber of infrared radiation It is the balance between these radiative processes that determines the net effect of ozone on climate. Changes in ozone in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere (below 25 km) are most effective in determining the change in radiative forcing, with increased ozone leading to an increased radiative forcing which would be expected to warm the surface (e g , Wang and Sze, 1980, Lacis et al , 1990) This is because the greenhouse effect is directly proportional to the temperature contrast between the level of emission and the levels at which radiation is absorbed This contrast is greatest near the tropopause where temperatures are at a minimum compared to the surface. Above about 30 km, added ozone causes a decrease in surface temperature because it absorbs extra solar radiation, effectively robbing the troposphere of direct solar energy that would otherwise warm the surface (Lacis et al, 1990).

Table 2.1: Direct radiative effects and indnect tiace gas chemical-climate inteiactions (based on Wuebbles et al. 1989)

Gas	Greenhouse Gas	Is its tropospheric concentration affected by chemistry?	Effects on tropospheric chemistry? *	Effects on * stratospheric chemistry?
CO2	Yes	No	No	Yes, affects O3 (see text)
ch4	Yes	Yes, reacts with OH	Yes, affects OH, O3 and  CO2	Yes, affects O3 and H2O
CO	Yes, but weak	Yes, reacts with OH	Yes, affects OH, O3 and  CO2	Not significantly
N2O	Yes	No	No	Yes, affects O3
NOx	Yes	Yes, reacts with OH	Yes, affects OH and O3	Yes, affects O3
CFC-11	Yes	No	No	Yes, affects O3
CFC-12	Yes	No	No	Yes, affects O3
CFC-113	Yes	No	No	Yes, affects O3
HCFC-22	Yes	Yes, reacts with OH	No	Yes, affects O3
CH3CC13	Yes	Yes, reacts with OH	No	Yes, affects O3
CFjCIBr	Yes	Yes, photolysis	No	Yes, affects O3
CF3Br	Yes	No	No	Yes, affects O3
SO2	Yes, but weak	Yes, reacts with OH	Yes, increases aerosols	Yes, increases aerosols
CH3SCH3	Yes, but weak	Yes, reacts with OH	Source of SO2	Not significantly
CS2	Yes, but weak	Yes, reacts with OH	Source of COS	Yes, increases aerosols
COS	Yes, but weak	Yes, reacts with OH	Not significant	Yes, increases aerosols
O3	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes

* - Effects on atmospheric chemistry are limited to effects on constituents having a significant influence on climate

Stratospheric water vapour is an important greenhouse gas A major source of stratospheric water vapour is the oxidation of methane (eg , WMO 1985), it is anticipated that increased atmospheric concentrations of methane will lead to increases in stratospheric water vapour It is also possible that changes in climate will affect the transfer of water vapour from the troposphere to the stratosphere, although the sign of the net effect on stratospheric water vapour is unclear Unfortunately, observations of stratospheric water vapour are inadequate for trend detection In this section the impact of increased emissions of methane on stratospheric water vapour will be included as an indirect radiative forcing due to methane

The oxidation of fossil based methane and carbon monoxide in the atmosphere lead to the production of additional carbon dioxide Although CO2 has no known chemical interactions of consequence within the troposphere or stratosphere its increasing concentrations can affect the concentrations of stratospheric ozone through its radiative cooling of the stratosphere In the upper stratosphere the cooling slows down catalytic ozone destruction and results in a net increase in ozone, where heterogeneous ozone destruction is important, as in the Antarctic lower stratosphere ozone destruction may be accelerated by this cooling (UNEP, 1989) The combination of these indirect effects, along with their direct radiative effects, determines the actual changes in radiative forcing resulting from these greenhouse gases

The hydroxyl radical, OH is not itself a greenhouse gas but it is extremely important in the troposphere as a chemical scavenger Reactions with OH largely control the atmospheric lifetime, and, therefore the concentrations ol many gases important in determining climate change These gases include CH4 CO the non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs), the hydrochlorolluorocarbons (HCFCs), the hvdrofluorocarbons (HFCs) CH3CCI3, H2S SO2 and dimethyl sulphide (DMS) Then reaction with OH also affects the production of tropospheric ozone, as well as determining the amounts of these compounds leaching the stratosphere, where these species can cause changes in the ozone distribution In turn the reactions ol these gases with OH also affects its atmospheric concentration The increase in tropospheric water vapour concentration expected as a result of global warming would also increase photochemical production of OH It is important that effects of interaction between OH and the greenhouse gases, along with the resulting impact on atmospheric lifetimes of these gases, be accounted for in analysing the possible state ol future climate

The indirect effects can have a significant elfect on the total forcing these effects will be detailed later in the section

2.2.4	Relationship Between Radiative Forcing and Concentration

To estimate climate change using simple energy balance climate models (see Section 6) and in order to estimate the relative importance of different greenhouse gases in past, present and future atmospheres (e g , using Global Warming Potentials, see Section 2 2 7), it is necessary to express the radiative forcing for each particular gas in terms of its concentration change This can be done in terms of the changes in net radiative flux at the tropopause

AF = f(C0, C)

where AF is the change in net flux (in Wm’^) corresponding to a volumetric concentration change from Co toC

Direct-effect AF-AC relationships are calculated using detailed radiative transfer models Such calculations simulate the complex variations of absorption and emission with wavelength for the gases included, and account for the overlap between absorption bands of the gases, the effects of clouds on the transfer of radiation are also accounted for

As was discussed in Section 2 2 2, the forcing is given by the change in net flux at the tropopause However as is explained by Ramanathan et al (1987) and Hansen et al (1981) great care must be taken in the evaluation of this change When absorber amount varies, not only does the flux at the tropopause respond, but also the overlying stratosphere is no longer in radiative equilibrium For some gases, and in particular CO2, the concentration change acts to cool the stratosphere, for others, and in particular the CFCs, the stratosphere warms (see e g Table 5 of Wang et al (1990)) Calculations of the change in forcing at the tropopause should allow the stratosphere to come into a new equilibrium with this altered flux divergence, while tropospheric temperatures are held constant The consequent change in stratospheric temperature alters the downward emission at the tropopause and hence the forcing The AF-AC relationships used here implicitly account for the stratospheric response If this point is ignored, then the same change in llux at the tropopause from dilferent forcing agents can lead to a different tropospheric temperature response Allowing for the stratospheric adjustment means that the temperature response for the same flux change from different causes are in far closer agreement (Lacis, personal communication) The form of the AF AC relationship depends primarily on the gas concentration For low/moderate/lugh concentrations, the form is well approximated by a linear/square-root/logarithmic dependence of AF on conccntiation For ozone, the form follows none ol these because ol marked vertical variations in absorption and concentration Vertical variations in concentiation change

Table 2.2: Expressions used to dense ladiatise foinin> Joi past fiends and futuie scenanos of tpeenhouse x>as

(Oiuenti at ions

TRACE GAS	RADIATIVE FORCING  APPROXIMATION GIVING AF  IN Wm-2	COMMENTS
	AF = 6 3 In (C/Co)	Functional form from Wigley (1987),
Carbon dioxide	where C is CO2 in ppmv for C	coefficient derived from Hansen et al
	< 1000 ppmv	(1988)
	AF = 0 036 (s/M - s/M0) -	Functional form from Wigley (1987),
Methane	(f(M, N0)-f(M0, No))	coefficient derived from Hansen et al
	where M is CH4 in ppbv	(1988) Overlap term, f(M, N) from
	and N is N2O in ppbv Valid for M <5ppmv	Hansen et al (1988)*
	AF = 0 14 (s/N - s/N0) -	Functional form from Wigley (1987),
Nitrous Oxide	(f(M0,N)-f(M0, No))	coefficient derived from Hansen et
	with M and N as above	al (1988) Overlap term from Hansen et
	Valid for N <5ppmv	al (1988)*
	AF = 0 22 ( X - Xo)	Based on Hansen et al (1988)
CFC-11	where X is CFC-11 in ppbv Valid for X <2ppbv	
	AF = 0 28 (Y - Yo)	Based on Hansen et al (1988)
CFC-12	where Y is CFC-12 in ppbv  Valid for Y <2ppbv	
	AF = 0 011 (sfM - s/M0)	Stratospheric water vapour forcing taken
Stratospheric water vapour	where M is CH4 in ppbv	to be 0 3 of methane forcing without overlap based on Wuebbles et al (1989)
	AF = 0 02 (O - Oo)	Very tentative illustrative
Tropospheric ozone	where O is ozone	parameterization based on value from
	in ppbv	Hansen et al (1988)
	AF = A (Z - Zo)	Coefficients A derived from Fisher et al
Other CFCs, HCFCs and HFCs	where A based on forcing relative to  CFC-11 in Table 2 4 and  Z is constituent in ppbv	(1990)

Methane-Nitrous Oxide overlap term

f (M, N) = 0 47 In [1 + 2 01x10'5 (MN)0 75 + 5 3] x 10“15 M (MN) 1 52), m and N are in ppbv

Note typographical error on page 9360 of Hansen et al (1988) 0 014 should be 0 14

lor ozone make it even more difficult to relate AF to concentration in a simple way

The actual relationships between forcing and concentration derived from detailed models can be used to develop simple expressions (e g , Wigley, 1987, Hansen et al 1988) which are then more easily used for a large number of calculations Such simple expressions are used in this Section The values adopted and their sources are given in Table 2 2 Values derived front Hansen et al have

been multiplied by 3 35 (Lacis, personal communication) to convert forcing as a temperature change to forcing as a change in net flux at the tropopause after allowing for stratospheric temperature change These expressions should be considered as global mean forcings, they implicitly include the radiative ellecls of global mean cloud cover

Significant spatial variations in AF will exist because its value for any given AC depends on the assumed

tempeiatuie and water vapour profiles Variations will also occur due to spatial variations in mean cloudiness These factors can produce marked differences in the relative contributions of different greenhouse gases to total radiative forcing in different regions but these are not accounted for here

Uncertainties in AF-AC relationships arise in three ways First, there are still uncertainties in the basic spectroscopic data for many gases In particular, data for CFCs, HFCs and HCFCs are probably only accurate to within ±10-20% Part of this uncertainty is related to the temperature dependence of the intensities, which is generally not known For some of these gases, only cross-section data are available For the line intensity data that do exist, there have been no detailed mtcrcomparisons of results from

Table 2.3: Radiative foicmg ielati\e to CO2 pei unit molecule change, and pei unit mass change tn the atmosphei efoi pi esent day c one enti ations CO2 CH4 and N2Ofoicingsfiom 1990 concentiations in Table 2 5

TRACE GAS	AF for AC per molecule relative to CO2	AF for AC per unit mass relative to CO2
CO2	1	1
CH4	21	58
N2O	206	206
CFC-11	12400	3970
CFC-12	15800	5750
CFC-113	15800	3710
CFC-114	18300	4710
CFC-115	14500	4130
HCFC-22	10700	5440
CCI4	5720	1640
CH3CCI3	2730	900
CF3Br	16000	4730
Possible CFC		
substitutes		
HCFC-123	9940	2860
HCFC-124	10800	3480
HFC-125	13400	4920
HFC-134a	9570	4130
HCFC 141b	7710	2900
HCFC 142b	10200	4470
HFC 143a	7830	4100
HFC 152a	6590	4390

different laboratories Further information on the available spectroscopic data is given by Husson (1990)

Second, uncertainties arise through details in the radiative transfer modelling Intercomparisons made under the auspices of WCRP (Luther and Fouquart, 1984) suggest that these uncertainties are around ±10% (although schemes used in climate models disagreed with detailed calculations by up to 25% for the flux change at the tropopause on doubling CO2)

Third, uncertainties arise through assumptions made in the radiative model with regard to the following

(1)	the assumed or computed vertical profile of the concentration change For example, for CFCs and HCFCs, results can depend noticeably on the assumed change in stratospheric concentration (see e g , Ramanathan et al, 1985)

(11)	the assumed or computed vertical profiles of temperature and moisture

Table 2.4: Radiatixe foicmg of a numbei of CFCs, possible CFC substitutes and othei halocaibons lelatixe to CFC-11 pei unit molecule and pei unit mass change All values, except CF3B1, fiom Fishei et al, 1990 CF3B1 fi om Ramanathan et al, 1985

TRACE GAS	AF/AC per molecule relative to CFC 11	AF/AC per unit mass relative to  CFC 11
CFC-11	1 00	1 00
CFC-12	1 27	1 45
CFC-113	1 27	0 93
CFC-114	1 47	1 18
CFC-115	1 17	1 04
HCFC-22	0 86	1 36
HCFC-123	0 80	0 72
HCFC-124	0 87	0 88
HFC-125	1 08	1 24
HFC-134a	0 77	1 04
HCFC-14 lb	0 62	0 73
HCFC-142b	0 82	1 12
HFC-143a	0 63	1 03
HFC-152a	0 53	1 10
CCI4	0 46	0 45
CH3CCI3	0 22	0 23
CF3Br	1 29	1 19

(111)	assumptions made with regard to cloudiness Clear sky AF values are in general 20% greater than those using realistic cloudiness

(iv)	the assumed concentrations of other gases (usually, present-day values are used) These are important because they determine the overall IR flux and because of overlap between the absorption lines of different gases

(v)	the indirect effects on the radiative forcing due to chemical interactions as discussed in Section 2 2 3

The overall effect of this third group of uncertainties on AF is probably at least ±10%

Direct radiative forcing changes for the different greenhouse gases can be easily compared using the above AF-AC relationships There are two ways in which these comparisons may be made, per unit volumetric concentration change (equivalent to per molecule) or per unit mass change Comparison for the major greenhouse gases are given in Table 2 3 The relative strength of the CFCs, HFCs and HCFCs, relative to CFC-11, are shown in Table 2 4 (from Fisher et al , 1990) It can be seen that, by

these measures, many of the potential CFC substitutes are strong infrared absorbers

2.2.5	Past and Present Changes in Radiative Forcing

Based on the expressions given in Table 2 2 the radiative forcing between 1765 and 1990 was calculated using observed variations of the greenhouse gases The concentrations are given in Table 2 5, they are updated values from Wigley (1987) and Section 1 Values for 1990 have been extrapolated from recent values In addition to the well-observed variations in the gases given in Table 2 5, it is assumed that increased concentrations of methane have led to increases in stratospheric water vapour, although such changes are based entirely on model estimates (see Section 2 2 3)

Table 2 6 gives the contributions to the forcing for a number of periods This is shown diagrammatically in Figure 2 2 as the change in total forcing from 1765 concentrations, it is shown as a change in forcing per decade in Figure 2 3

Table 2.5: Tiace gas concent/ationsfrom 1765 to 1990, used to constiuct Figuie 2 2

YEAR	co2 (ppmv)	CH4 (ppbv)	n2o (ppbv)	CFC-11 (ppbv)	CFC-12 (ppbv)
1765	279 00	790 0	285 00	0	0
1900	295 72	974 1	292 02	0	0
1960	316 24	1272 0	296 62	00175	0 0303
1970	324 76	1420 9	298 82	0 0700	0 1211
1980	337 32	1569 0	302 62	0 1575	0 2725
1990	353 93	17170	309 68	0 2800	0 4844

Table 2.6: Foicing in Wnr2 due to changes in tiace gas concentiations in Table 2 5 All values aie foi changes in foicing fiom 1765 concentiations The change due to stiatospheiic watei vapoui is an induect effect of changes in methane concentiation (see text)

YEAR		SUM	co2	CH4 direct	Strat  H2O	n2o	CFC-11	CFC-12	Other  CFCs
1765	1900	0 53	0 37	0 10	0 034	0 027	00	00	00
1765	1960	1 17	0 79	0 24	0 082	0 045	0 004	0 008	0 005
1765	1970	1 48	0 96	0 30	0 10	0 054	0014	0 034	0 021
1765	1980	1 91	1 20	0 36	0 12	0 068	0 035	0 076	0 048
1765	1990	2 45	1 50	0 42	0 14	0 10	0 062	0 14	0 085

Figure 2.2: Changes in radiative forcing (Wm'2) due to increases tn greenhouse gas concentrations between 1765 and 1990 Values are changes in forcing from 1765 concentrations

Legend

CD	CD	CD

tn	o	o

CD	CD	CD

r*	CD	CD

Year

Figure 2.3: Decadal contributions to radiative forcing (Wm 2) due to increases in greenhouse gas concentrations for periods between 1765 and 1990 The changes for the periods 1765-1900 and 1900-1960 are the total changes during these periods divided by the number of decades

Changes tn halocarbons other than CFC-11 and CFC-12 have been accounted for by using concentration changes from Section 1 and the forcing versus-conccntration changes given in Tables 2 2 and 2 4 It is lound that they contribute an extia 43% of the sum of the forcing fiom CFC-11 and CFC 12, most of this contubution results fiom

changes in HCFC-22, CFC-1 13, carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform This is in reasonable agreement with Hansen et al (1989) who using less lecent spectioscopic data, find these halocarbons contribute an extra 60C of the combined CFC-11 and CFC-12 forcing

For the period 1765 to 1990, CO2 has contributed about 61% of the forcing, methane 17% plus 6% from stratospheric water vapour, N2O 4% and the CFCs 12% For the decade 1980-1990, about 56% of the forcing has been due to changes in CCD, 11% due to the direct effects of CH4 and 4% via stratospheric water vapour, 6% from N2O and 24% from the CFCs

As discussed in Section 1, the distribution of tropospheric ozone has almost certainly changed over this period, with a possible impact on ladiative forcing Difficulties in assessing the global changes in ozone, and in calculating the resultant radiative forcing, prevent a detailed assessment of the effect Estimates of tropospheric ozone change driven by changing methane and NOX emissions are highly model dependent partly because of the inherent spatial averages used in current twodimensional models Estimates of changes in tropospheric ozone from pre-industrial values (e g Hough and Derwent 1990) and simplified estimates of the ladiative foicing (Table 2 2) suggest that tropospheric ozone may have contributed about 10% of the total forcing due to greenhouse gases since pre-industrial times

Decreases in lower stratospheric ozone, particularly since the mid-70s, may have led to a decreased radiative forcing, this may have compensated for the effects of tropospheric ozone (Hansen et al ,1989, Lacis et al 1990) This compensation should be considered as largely fortuitous, as the mechanisms influencing ozone concentrations in the troposphere and stratosphere are somewhat different

2.2.6	Calculations of Future Forcing

Using the radiative forcing expressions described in Section 2 2 4. and the four scenarios developed by Working Group III, possible changes in radiative forcing over the next century can be calculated The four scenarios are intended to provide insight into policy analysis for a range of potential changes in concentrations, Scenario A is a 'Business as Usual case, whilst Scenarios B,C and D represent cases of reduced emissions These four scenarios are consideied in more detail in the Appendix 1 As in the previous section the indirect effect of methane on forcing via stratospheric watei vapour changes is included, whilst the effects of possible changes in ozone are neglected

It must be stiessed here that the gas icfeired to as HCFC-22 as given in the scenanos is used as a surrogate for all the CFC substitutes Since all HCFCs and HFCs arc of similar ladiative strength on a molecule-pei-molecule basis (see Table 2 4) the enoi fiom this source in using HCFC-22 as

Radiative Forcing (Wm‘2)	Radiative Forcing (Wnr2)

1975	2000	2025	2050	2075	2100

Year

SCENARIO B

9

8

7

1975	2000	2025	2050	2075	2100

Year

10

9

CM 8

I

CM

I

E

5

SCENARIO C

c

1975	2000	2025	2050	2075	2100

Year

O) c o k_ o

<D >

■w ra ■S

<a CC

10

9

8

7

6



SCENARIO D

Legend

□	Strat H2O  HCFC22
im	CFC12
■	CFC11
mu	N2O
□	CH4
0	CO2

1975	2000	2025	2050	2075	2100

Year

Figure 2.4: Possible future changes in radiative forcing (Wm 2) t]ue to increases in greenhouse gas concentrations between 1985 and 2100 using the foui policy scenarios given in the Appendix 1 Values are changes in forcing from 1765 concentrations

a proxy for the other gases will be small However, since the concentrations, as specified in the scenarios, were calculated assuming the HCFC-22 lifetime and molecular weight considerable errors in the forcing may result from eriors in the concentrations Since some of the CFC substitutes have a longer lifetime than HCFC-22, and some shorter it is not possible to calculate the sign of the error without knowing the precise mix ol substitutes used

Figuie 2 4 shows the radiative loicing change (horn pre industiial) toi each gas from the loui scenanos the icsults aie tabulated in Table 2 7

Foi these scenanos CCH temains the dominant conti ibutoi to change thioughout the period In the

Business as Usual Scenario, lor example, its contribution to the change always exceeds 60% For the scenarios chosen for this analysis, the contribution of HCFC-22 becomes significant in the next century It is contributing 11% of the 25 year forcing change between 2025-2050 in the Busincss-as-Usual Scenario and 18% in Scenario B

Since the concentration of chlorine can be anticipated to increase in the stratosphere for at least the next decade (Section 1 6 2 see also Piathci and Watson 1990) fuither decreases in stiatospheiic ozone can be anticipated Deci eases in uppei sti atosphei ic ozone will lead to a small warming eilect decieases in the lowci stiatospheie would cause a cooling el led A 1% loss in ozone in the lower

Table 2 7: Changes in ladiatixe fencing m Wm 2 foi the 4 policy scenanos The change due to stratosphei ic xxatei xapom is an indued effect of changes in methane concentiation (see text) All xalues aie changes mfoictngfiom 1765 concent) ations

SCENARIO A (Business-as-Usual)

YEAR	SUM	co2	CH4 direct	Strat  H?O	n20	CFC-11	CFC-12	HCFC- 22
1765 2000	2 95	1 85	051	0 18	0 12	0 08	0 17	0 04
1765 2025	4 59	2 88	0 72	0 25	021	0 11	0 25	0 17
1765 2050	6 49	4 15	0 90	0 31	031	0 12	0 30	0 39
1765 2075	8 28	5 49	1 02	0 35	0 40	0 13	0 35	0 55
1765 2100	9 90	6 84	1 09	0 38	0 47	0 14	0 39	0 59

SCENARIO B (Low Emissions)								
YEAR	SUM	CO2	CH4 direct	Strat  H?O	n2o	CFC-11	CFC-12	HCFC- 22
1765 2000	2 77	1 75	0 45	0 16	0 11	0 08	0 17	0 04
1765 2025	3 80	2 35	0 56	0 19	0 18	0 10	0 24	0 17
1765 2050	4 87	2 97	0 65	0 22	0 23	0 11	0 29	0 39
1765 2075	5 84	3 69	0 66	0 23	0 28	0 12	0 33	0 53
1765 2100	6 68	4 43	0 66	0 23	0 33	0 12	0 36	0 56

SCENARIO C (Control Policies)

YEAR	SUM	co2	CH4 direct	Strat  H?O	N2O	CFC-11	CFC-12	HCFC- 22
1765 2000	2 74	1 75	0 44	0 15	0 11	0 08	0 17	0 05
1765 2025	3 63	2 34	0 51	0 17	0 17	0 07	0 17	0 20
1765 2050	4 49	2 96	0 53	0 18	0 22	0 05	0 14	041
1765 2075	5 00	3 42	0 47	0 16	0 25	0 03	0 12	0 55
1765 2100	5 07	3 62	0 37	0 13	0 27	0 02	0 10	0 57

SCENARIO D (Accelerated Policies)

YEAR	SUM	co2	CH4 direct	Strat  H?O	n2o	CFC-11	CFC-12	HCFC- 22
1765 2000	2 74	1 75	0 44	0 15	0 11	0 08	0 17	0 04
1765 2025	3 52	2 29	0 47	0 16	0 17	0 07	0 17	0 20
1765 2050	3 99	2 60	0 43	0 15	0 21	0 05	0 14	0 40
1765 2075	4 22	2 77	0 39	0 13	0 24	0 03	0 12	0 53
1765 2100	4 30	2 90	0 34	0 12	0 26	0 02	0 10	0 56

2.2.7	A Global Warming Potential Concept for Trace Gases

In considcnng the policy options for dealing with greenhouse gases, it is necessary to have a simple means of describing the relative abilities of emissions of each greenhouse gas to affect radiative forcing and hence climate A useful approach could be to express any estimates relative to the trace gas of primary concern, namely carbon dioxide ft would follow on from the concept of relative Ozone Depletion Potential (ODP) which has become an integral part of the Montreal Protocol and othei national and international agreements for contiolling emissions of halocarbons (eg UNEP 1989) The long lifetime of some greenhouse gases implies some commitment to possible climate impacts for decades oi centimes to come, and hence the inclusion of potential in the formulation of the concept

Estimates of the relative greenhouse forcing based on atmosphenc concentiations have been detailed in Section 2 2 3 these are relatively straightforward to evaluate Relative forcings based on emissions are of much gieater intnnsic interest to policy makers but require a careful considciation of the radiative properties of the gases their lifetimes and then indirect effects on greenhouse gases Wuebbles (1989) has reviewed vanous approaches to the design oi relative forcings based on emissions using past and cuiient trends in global emissions and concentrations

It must be stressed that thcie is no universally accepted methodology for combining all the relevant factois into a single global warming potential lor greenhouse gas emissions In fact there may be no single approach which will tepiesent all the needs of policy makers A simple appioach has been adopted here to illustrate the difllcultics inheient in the concept, to lllustiate the importance ol some of the cui rent gaps in understanding and to demonstrate the cuiient tange of uncertainties However, because of the impoitance of greenhouse warming potentials, a preliminary evaluation is made

The Global Warming Potential (GWP) of the emissions of a greenhouse gas, as employed in this report, is the time integrated commitment to climate forcing from the instantaneous release of 1 kg of a trace gas expressed relative to that from 1 kg of carbon dioxide

J aicidt

J 0

GWP= _________________________

j aCO2cCO2dt

where a] is the instantaneous radiative forcing due to a unit increase in the concentration of trace gas, i, Cj is concentration of the trace gas, i, remaining at lime, t, after its release and n is the number of years over which the calculation is performed The corresponding values for carbon dioxide are in the denominator

Fisher et al (1990) have used a similar analysis to derive a global warming potential for halocarbons taken relative to CFC-11 In then work it is implicitly assumed that the integration time is out to infinity

Early attempts at defining a concept of global warming potentials (Lashof and Ahuja 1990, Rodhc, 1990, Derwent 1990) are based on the instantaneous emissions into the atmosphere of a quantity of a particular tiacc gas The tiace gas concentration then declines with time and whilst it is present in the atmosphere it generates a giecnhouse wanning If its decline is due to atmospheric chemistry processes then the pioducts of these leactions may generate an additional gicenhouse wanning A leahstic emissions sccnano can be thought of as due to a large number of instantaneous releases of different magnitudes over an extended time period and some emission abatement scenarios can be evaluated using this concept

Particular pioblems associated with evaluating the GWP are

the estimation of atmospheric lifetimes ol gases (and in particular CO2), and the variation of that lifetime in the future,

the dependence of the radiative forcing of a gas on its concentration and the concentration of other gases with spectrally overlapping absorption bands

the calculation of the indirect effects of the emitted gases and the subsequent radiative effects of these indirect greenhouse gases (ozone poses a particular problem),

the specification of the most appropriate time period over which to perform the integration

The full resolution of the above problems must await further research The assumptions made in the present assessment are described below

For some environmental impacts, it is important to evaluate the cumulative greenhouse warming over an extended period alter the instantaneous release of the trace gas For the evaluation of sea-level rise, the commitment to greenhouse warming over a 100 year or longer time horizon may be appropriate For the evaluation of short term effects, a time horizon of a few decades could be taken, for example, model studies show that continental areas are able to respond rapidly to ladiative foicing (see e g , Section 6) so that the relative effects of emissions on such timescales arc relevant to predictions ol near-term climate change This consideration alone diamatically changes the emphasis between the different gicenhouse

gases, depending on their persistence in the atmosphere For this leason, global warming potentials in Table 2 8 have been evaluated over 20, 100 and 500 yeais These three different time horizons are presented as candidates for discussion and should not be considered as having any special significance

The figures presented in Table 2 8 should be considered preliminary only Considerable uncertainty exists as to the lifetimes of methane and many of the halocarbons, due to difficulties in modelling the chemistry of the troposphere The specification of a single lifetime for carbon dioxide also presents difficulties, this is an approximation ol the actual lifetime due to the transfer of CO2 amongst the different reservoirs The detailed time behaviour of a pulse of carbon dioxide added to the atmosphere has been described using an ocean-atmosphere-biosphere carbon dioxide model (Siegenthaler, 1983) The added carbon dioxide declines in a markedly non-exponential manner there is an initial fast decline over the first 10 year period, followed by a more gradual decline over the next 100 years and a rather slow decline over the thousand year time-scale The time period for the first half-life is typically around 50 years for the second, about 250 yeais (see Section 1 2 1 for details) A single lifetime figuie defined by the decline to 1/e is about 120 years Indeed the uncertainties associated with specifying the lifetime ol CCh means that presentation of the GWP relative to CCb may not be the ideal choice, relative GWPs of gases other than CO2 to each other are not alfected by this uncertainty

In peiforming the integration of giecnhouse impacts into the future a number of simplifications have been made The neglect of the dependence ol the radiative teim on the trace gas conccntiation implies small trace gas concentration changes Furthci, the overlap of the mfraicd absorption bands of methane and nitrous oxide may be significant and this restucts the application of the GWP to small pci tui bations aiound present day concentrations

An assumption implicit in this simple appioach is that the atmosphenc lifetimes of the tiacc gases lcmain constant over the integiation time horizon This is likely to be a pool assumption for many trace gases for a variety of different reasons For those tiace gases which are removed by tropospheric OH radicals, a significant change in lifetime could be anticipated in the luture, depending on the impact of human activities on methane, caibon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen emissions For some scenarios, as much as a 50% inciease in methane and HCFC 22 lifetimes has been estimated Such mcieases in lifetime have a diamatic influence on the global waiming potentials in Table 2 8, integrated ovei the longer time horizons Much more woik needs to be done to determine global warming potentials which will properly account foi the pioccsses allecting atmospheric composition and foi the possible non-lineai

feedbacks influencing the impacts of trace gases on climate

It is recognised that the emissions of a number of trace gases, including NOX, carbon monoxide, methane and other hydrocarbons, have the potential to influence the distribution of tropospheric ozone It is not straightforward to estimate the greenhouse warming potential of these indirect effects because changes in tropospheric ozone depend, in a complex and non-linear manner on the concentrations of a range of species The limited spatial resolution in current tropospheric chemistry models means that estimates of increased tropospheric ozone production are highly model-dependent Furthermore, the radiative impacts of tropospheric ozone changes depend markedly on their spatial distribution As a result, the GWP values for the secondary greenhouse gases have been provided as first order estimates only, using results from a tropospheric twodimensional model of global atmospheric chemistry (Hough and Derwent, 1990) and the radiative forcing given in Table 2 2 (see Derwent (1990) for further details) Evaluation of the radiative forcing resulting from changes in concentrations of stratospheric ozone (as a result of CFC, N2O, and CH4 emissions) have not been included due to insufficient time to undertake the analysis this requires

Bearing in mind the uncertainties inherent in Table 2 8, a number of important points are raised by the results Firstly, over a twenty year period a kilogram of all the proposed CFC substitutes, with the exception of the relatively short lived HCFC-123 and HFC-152a, cause more than a three order of magnitude greater warming than

1	kg of CO2 However, tor a number of these gases (but not the live CFCs themselves) the global warming potential reduces markedly as the integration time is increased, this implies that over the long term, the replacement compounds should have a much lower global warming effect than the CFCs they replace, for the same levels of emissions In addition, the shorter lifetimes imply that abrupt changes in total emissions would impact on the actual global warming relatively quickly A lurther important point is that in terms of radiative forcing over the short-term the effect of the CFC substitutes is considerably gieater than indicated by the halocarbon global warming potential (GWP) of Fisher et al (1990) For example, over a 20 year period, the effect of 1 kg emission of HCFC 22 conti ibutes only slightly less to the radiative forcing than the same amount of CFC-11, even though its 'infinite' GWP is about 0 35 This is because, on a kg-per-kg basis, HCFC 22 is a stronger greenhouse gas than CFC-11 (Table

2	4)

The indirect greenhouse warmings listed in Table 2 8 are potentially very significant The production of CO? stiatospheiic watei vapoui and tropospheric ozone as a lesult ol emissions of methane leads to an mdnect ellect

Table 2.8: Global h aiming potentials follow mg the instantaneous injec tion of I kg of each tiace gas, i elative to caibon dioxide A spec ific example of an application of these potentials is gix en m Table 2 9

Trace Gas	Estimated Lifetime, years	Global Warming Potential		
		Integration Time Horizon, Years		
		20	100	500
Carbon Dioxide	*	1	1	1
Methane - inc indirect	10	63	21	9
Nitrous Oxide	150	270	290	190
CFC-11	60	4500	3500	1500
CFC-12	130	7100	7300	4500
HCFC-22	15	4100	1500	510
CFC-113	90	4500	4200	2100
CFC-114	200	6000	6900	5500
CFC-115	400	5500	6900	7400
HCFC 123	1 6	310	85	29
HCFC-124	66	1500	430	150
HFC-125	28	4700	2500	860
HFC-134a	16	3200	1200	420
HCFC-141b	8	1500	440	150
HCFC-142b	19	3700	1600	540
HFC-143a	41	4500	2900	1000
HFC 152a	1 7	510	140	47
CCI4	50	1900	1300	460
CH3 CCI3	6	350	100	34
CF3Br	110	5800	5800	3200
INDIRECT EFFECTS  Source Gas	Greenhouse Gas Affected			
CH4	Tropospheric O3	24	8	3
CH4	CO2	3	3	3
CH4	Stratospheric H2O	10	4	1
CO	Tropospheric O3	5	1	0
CO	CO2	2	2	2
NOX	Tropospheric O3	150	40	14
NMHC	Tropospheric O3	28	8	3
NMHC	CO2	3	3	3

CrCs and other gases do not include effect through depletion of stratospheric ozone

Changes in lifetime and variations of radiative forcing with concentration are neglected The effects of N2O forcing due to changes in CH4 (because of overlapping absorption), and vice versa, are neglected

* The persistence of carbon dioxide has been estimated by explicitly integrating the box-diffusion model of Siegenthaler (1983) an approximate lifetime is 120 years

almost as large as the direct effect for integration times of a century 01 longct The potential for emissions of gases, such as CO NOX and the non-mcthane hydrocarbons, to contribute indirectly to global warming is also significant It must be stressed that these indirect effects arc highly

model dependent and they will need further revision and evaluation An example of uncertainty concerns the impact of NOX emissions, these emissions generate OH which leads to increased destruction of gases such as methane (e g , Thompson et al , 1989) This would constitute a

Table 2.9: Example of use of Global Wainnng Potentials The table shows the integiated effects osei a 100 yeai time hoiizon of total emissions m 1990 gisen as a ftaction of the total effec t

Trace Gas	Current Man  Made Emissions  Tgyr-1	Proportion of total effects %
CO2	26000	61
CH4	300	15
N2O	6	4
CFC-11	03	2
CFC 12	04	7
HCFC-22	0 1	04
CFC 113	0 15	1 5
CFC-114	0015	02
CFC 115	0 005	0 1
CCI4	0 09	03
ch3cci3	081	02
CO	200	1
NOX	66	6
NMHCs	20	05

Carbon dioxide emissions given on CO2 basis, equivalent to 7 GtC yr'' Nitrous oxide emissions given on N2O basis, equivalent to 4 MtN yr ' NOX emissions given on NO2 basis equivalent to 20 MtN yr '

negative indirect effect of NOX emissions which would oppose the forcing due to increased tropospheric ozone formation

As an example of the use of the Global Warming Potentials, Table 2 9 shows the integrated effects over a 100 year time horizon for the estimated human-related greenhouse gas emissions in 1990 The derived cumulative effects, derived by multiplying the appropriate GWP by the 1990 emissions rate, indicates that CO2 will account for 61% of the radiative forcing over this time period Emissions of NOX, whose effect is entirely indirect is calculated to contribute 6% to the total forcing

2.3	Other Radiative Forcing Agents

231 Solar Radiation

The Sun is the primary source of energy for the Earth s climate system Variations in the amount of solar ladiation received by the L arth can affect our climate There are two distinct sources of this variability The first which acts

with greatest impact on time-scales of 10,000 to 100,000 years is caused by changes in the Sun-Earth orbital parameters The second comes from physical changes on the Sun itself, such changes occur on almost all time-scales

2 3 11 Vai lability due to 01 bital c hanges

Variations in climate on time-scales ranging from 10,000 to 100,000 years, including the major glacial/interglacial cycles during the Quaternary period, are believed to be initiated by variations in the Earth s orbital parameters which in turn influence the latitudinal and seasonal variation of solar energy received by the Earth (the Milankovitch Effect) Although the covariation of these orbital parameters and the Earth s climate provides a compelling argument in favour of this theory, internal feedback processes have to be invoked to explain the observed climatic variations, in particular the amplitude of the dominating 100,000 year period one such feedback could be the changes to the carbon cycle and the greenhouse effect of atmospheric CO2 (see Section 1)

The radiative forcing associated with the Milankovitch Effect can be given for particular latitudes and months to illustrate that the rate of change of forcing is small compared to radiative forcing due to the enhanced greenhouse effect, of course, the climatic impact of the Milankovitch Effect results from the redistribution of solar energy, latitudinally and seasonally, so that a comparison is necessarily rather rough As an example, in the past 10,000 years, the incident solar radiation at 60°N in July has decreased by about 35 Wm'2 (e g , Rind et al , 1989), the average change in one decade is -0 035 Wm'2, compared with the estimate, in Section 2 2 5, that the greenhouse forcing over the most recent decade increased by 0 6 Wm'2 more than 15 times higher than the Milankovitch forcing

2 3 12 Vai lability due to changes tn total solai madiance Variations in the short-wave and radio-frequency outputs of the Sun respond to changes in the surface activity of the star and follow in phase with the 11-year sunspot cycle The greatest changes, in terms of total energy, occur in the short-wave region, and particularly the near ultraviolet At 0 3 pm, the solar cycle variation is less than 1%, since only about 1% of the Suns radiation lies at this or shorter wavelengths solar-cycle variations in the ultraviolet will by themselves induce variations of no more than 0 01% in total irradiance, although these may be important for atmospheric chemistry in the middle atmosphere

Of greater potential importance, in terms of direct affects on climate are changes integrated over all wavelengths the total solai irradiance or the so-called solar constant Continuous spaceborne measurements of total irradiance have been made since 1978 These have shown that on time-scales of days to a decade there are irradiance

Figure 2.5: Reconstructed solar irradiance (Wm 2) from 1874 to 1988 using the model of Foukal and Lean (1990), The model was calibrated using direct observations of solar irradiance from satellites between 1980 and 1988 Data from J Lean (pers comm ) Note that the solar forcing is only 0 175 times the irradiance due to area and albedo effects

variations that arc associated with activity in the Sun s outci layer, the photosphere specifically, sunspots and bright areas known as faculae The very high frequency changes aie too rapid to affect the climate noticeably However, thcie is a lower frequency component that follows the 11year sunspot cycle which may have a climatic effect It has been found that the increased irradiance due to faculae more than olfsets the decreases due to the cooler sunspots consequently, high sunspot numbers are associated with high solar output (Foukal and Lean, 1990) Over the period 1980-86, there was a decline in irradiance of about 1 Wm' 2 corresponding to a globally-avciaged forcing change at the top of the atmosphere of a little less than 0 2 Witt 2 Since then irradiance has increased, following the sunspot cycle (e g , Willson and Hudson, 1988)

This is computable with the greenhouse forcing which ovci the period 1980-86, increased by about 0 3 Wm 2 Howcvei over longer periods these solar changes would have conti ibuted only minimally towards offsetting the greenhouse effect on global-mean temperature because of the diflerent time-scales on which the two mechanisms opciatc Because of oceanic thermal inertia (see Section 6), and because of the relatively short time scale of the forcing changes associated with the solar cycle only a small Faction of possible temperature changes due to this souicc can be realised (Wigley and Raper 1990) In contrast the sustained nature of the greenhouse forcing allows a much greater fraction of the possible temperature change to be realised so that the greenhouse forcing dominates

Because the satellite record of solar irradiance began so recently, we cannot say with absolute certainty what past variations may have been However, a physically based statistical model has been developed by Foukal and Lean (1990), which attempts to reconstruct the solar-cycle related changes back more than 100 years (see Figure 2 5) This figure illustrates that the changes from 1980 to 1986 were probably the largest in the past century

While the model of Foukal and Lean (1990) indicates that the direct eflects of solar-cycle-rclated irradiance changes may have been very small this does not rule out the possibility of larger, lower-frequency effects Three possibilities have been hypothesized, they are not supported by direct observational evidence of solar irradiance variations, and their magnitudes are derived by assuming that observed or inferred temperature variations are responses to solar forcing The first idea is that on the time scale of about a century, some underlying variation exists that parallels the envelope of sunspot activity, i c the smooth curve joining the peaks of successive sunspot maxima (Eddy 1977, Reid, 1987) The envelope curve shows a quasi-cychc behaviour with period about 80-90 years referred to as the Gleissberg cycle (e g , Gilliland 1982, Gilliland and Schneider, 1984)

There is no reason why one should expect the envelope curve to be related to solar irradiance variations beyond those associated with the Foukal-Lcan mechanism Reids study appears to have been spurred by the visual similarity between the Folland et al (1984) global marine temperature curve and the envelope curve This similarity is less apparent when more recently compiled temperatures are considered (see e g , Section 7) and is much less apparent in the Southern Hemisphere than in the Northern With no way to estimate the range of irradiance variation a pi ton Reid tuned this to obtain a best match between modelled and observed temperatures Assuming solar change as the sole forcing mechanism, the implied decadal time-scale irradiance range is about 0 6%, or 1 5 Wm_2 at the top of the atmosphere, for an assumed climate sensitivity of 2 5°C for a CO2 doubling This value is about thirty times that inferred by direct satellite data

Reid emphasizes that his work is mainly an exercise in cuive-fitting so that the results should be used with extreme caution Nevertheless, it has been taken seriously by the Marshall Institute (1989) so a brief analysis is in order Kelly and Wigley (1990) have performed a similar analysis to Reid s incorporating a greenhouse forcing history (Section 2 2 5) and using more recent temperature compilations (Section 7) The amplitude A of the radiative foicing due to solar variability (which is tied to sunspot number) is evaluated so as to give the best agreement between observed and modelled temperatures between 1861 and 1989 The value of A which gives the best fit is found to depend critically on the assumed climate

sensitivity For values of equilibnum change due to doubled CO2 (see Section 5 2 1) ol greatei than 2°C, it is found that the best lit is obtained 11 there is a negative conclation between solar output and sunspot number (which conti adicts 1 ecent observations) At the lower end ot the lange of climate sensitivity suggested in Section 5 2 1(1 5°C) the best lit is obtained lor a value of A about one fifth that derived by Reid However, even for this xaluc the peiccntagc variance explained is only marginally bettei when the solar and greenhouse effects aic consideied togethci than when greenhouse forcing is considered alone This analysis provides no evidence lot low-frequency madiance variations larger than the small changes that have been dncctly inferred 110m satellite based irradiance observations

The second suggested solai eflect makes use of the relationship between solar iadius variations and 11 radiance changes Radius variations have been observed over the past lew centuries but whethei these could have significant irradiance changes associated with them is unknown The propottionallty constant iclating radius and madiance changes is so unceitain that it could imply an entnely negligible 01 a quite noticeable nradiance vanation (Gilliland 1982 Wigley 1988) Gilliland (1982) thercfoie ittempted to estimate the solar effect empirically by comparing modelled and observed data Gilliland concluded that solar induced quasi cyclic tempeiatuie changes (~8() yeai cycle) with iange about 0 2°C might exist but to obtain a reasonable fit he had to invoke a phase lag between radius and madiance changes Most theories iclating iadius and inadiance changes do not allow such a phase lag although an exception has been noted by Wigley (1988) While the physical basis for the iadius eflect is at least ieasonable these iesults aic far tiom being convincing in a statistical sense as Gilliland himself noted Nevertheless we cannot completely iule out the possibility of solar forcing changes ielated to radius vanations on an 80 year time-scale causing global mean tempeiatuie fluctuations with a iange of up to 0 2°C Hansen and Lacis (1990) rcgaid about 0 8 Wm ~ as a piobablc uppei limit foi the change in ioicing due to vanations in solar output ovei such periods

The thud suggested solai effect is that ielated to the minima in sunspot activity such as the Maundei Minimum lor which the associated changes in atmospheric radiocarbon content are used as a proxy These ideas were revived by Eddy (1977) The hypothesis has some credence in that the sunspot minima are manifestations ol solai change (although madiance changes associated with them would be only a few tenths Wm 2 based on the Foukal-Lean model) as aic radiocaibon fluctuations But neither is direct evidence of solar madiance changes Indirect evidence of madiance changes comes tronr the climate record specifically the observation that duung the

Holocene the timing of the neoglacial (1 e Little Ice Age type) events show some coriespondence with times of anomalous atmospheric radiocarbon content Wigley (1988) and Wigley and Kelly (1990) found the correlation over a 10 000 year period to be statistically sigmlicant but far from convincing Nevertheless, if one accepts its reality, the magnitude ol the solar forcing changes required to cause the observed neoglacial events can be shown to have been up to 1 3 Wm-- at the top of the atmosphere, averaged ovei 100 200 years These results have also been used by the Marshall Institute (1989) who suggest that another Little Ice Age is imminent and that this may substantially offset any future grcenhousc-gas-induced warming While one might expect such an event to occur some time in the future the timing cannot be predicted Further the 1 3 Wm-- solar change (which is an upper limit) is small compared with gieenhouse forcing and even if such a change occurred over the next few decades, it would be swamped by the enhanced greenhouse effect

2	3.2 Direct Aerosol Effects

The impact ot aerosol particles, 1 e solid or liquid particles in the si/e range 0 001-10 pm radius, on the radiation budget of the Earth-atmosphere system is manifold, either du ceils through scattering and absorption in the solar and theimal mfiaied spectial ranges or mdiiectls by the modification ol the miciophysical properties of clouds which affects then ladiative properties There is no doubt that aerosol particles influence the Earths climate However their influence is far more difficult to assess than that ol the trace gases because they constitute their own class ol substances with different size distributions shape chemical compositions and optical propeities and because then concentrations vary by orders of magnitude in space and time and because obscivations of their temporal and spatial vanation aic pooi (Section 1)

It is not easy to determine the sign of changes in the planetary ladiation budget due to aerosols Depending on absorption-to-backscattering ratio surface albedo total aeiosol optical depth and solar elevation if ordered appioximately according to importance - additional aerosol paitides may eithci increase or decrease local planetary albedo (eg Coakley and Chylck 1975 Grassl and Ncwiger 1982) A given aerosol load may increase the planetary albedo above an ocean surface and decrease it above a sand desert The effect of aerosol particles on tenestrial ladiation cannot be neglected, in conditions wheie the albedo change is small, the added greenhouse eflect can dominate (Grassl 1988)

While it is easy to demonstrate that aerosol particles measuiably ieducc solai inadiance in industrial regions the lack of data and inadequate spatial coverage preclude extending this demonstration to larger spatial scales Foi example Ball and Robinson (1982) have shown for the

eastern U.S. an average annual depletion of solar irradiance of 7 5% at the surface. Some of this depleted radiation will, however, have been absorbed within the troposphere, so that the perturbation to the net flux at the tropopause will be somewhat less and the impact on the thermal infrared is not quantified. Most of this perturbation is anthropogenic. The depletion is regionally very significant, for example, for a daily mean surface irradiance of 200 Wm_2, if about half of the depleted irradiance is lost to space, the change in lorcing would be 7.5 Wm’2.

Carbon black (soot) plays an especially important role for the local heating rate in the air as it is the only strong absorber in the visible and near infrared spectrum present in aerosol particles Soot incorporated into cloud particles can also directly affect the radiative properties of clouds by decreasing cloud albedo and hence lead to a positive forcing (c.g., Grassl 1988).

In view of the above uncertainties on the sign, the affected area and the temporal trend of the direct impact of aerosols, we are unable to estimate the change in forcing due to tropospheric aerosols.

Concentrations of stratospheric aerosols may be greatly enhanced over large areas for a few years following large explosive volcanic eruptions although there is no evidence for any secular increase in background aerosol (Section 1).

Major volcanic eruptions can inject gaseous sulphur dioxide and dust, among other chemicals, into the stratosphere The sulphur dioxide is quickly converted into sulphuric acid aerosols. If present in sufficient quantities in the stratosphere, where the half-life is about 1 year, these aerosols can sigmlicantly affect the net radiation balance of the Earth.

These aeiosols can drastically reduce (by up to tens of percent) the direct solar beam, although this is, to some extent, compensated by an increase in diffuse radiation, so that deci eases in total radiation are smaller (typically 510%) (e.g.. Spaenkuch, 1978; Coulson, 1988). This decrease in insolation, coupled with the warming due to the thermal infrared effects of the aerosols, leaves only a small deficit in the radiative heating at the surface, foi even a major volcanic eiuption Furthermore, volcanic aerosol clouds usually cover only a limited portion of the globe and they exist for a time (1-3 years) that is short compared to the response time of the ocean-atmosphere system (which is of order decades). Thus their climatic effects should be relatively short-lived. Because the size distribution and the optical properties of the particles are very important in determining whether the Earth's surface warms or cools, theoretical estimates of their effect on the surface climate are strongly dependent on the assumptions made about the aeiosols (eg.. Mass and Portman (1989) and references therein).

A number ol empirical studies have been carried out to detect the impact of volcanic eruptions on surface

temperatures over the last 100 years or more (e.g., Bradley, 1988; Mass and Portman, 1989) Generally these studies have concluded that major volcanic events, of which there were only about 5 during the past century, may cause a global-mean cooling of 0.1 to 0.2°C for a one to two year period after the event A dnect calculation of the radiative impact of a major volcanic eruption (Ramanathan, 1988) shows that the decadal radiative forcing may be 0.2 - 0.4 Wnr2. indicating that they can have a significant climatic impact on decadal time-scales.

There have also been claims of longer time-scale effects For example, Hammer et al. (1980) and Porter (1987) have claimed that the climate fluctuations of the last millemum, including events like the Little Ice Age, were due largely to variations in explosive volcanic activity, and various authors have suggested that decadal time-scale trends in the twentieth century were strongly influenced by the changing frequencies of large eruptions (SCOPE, 1986). These claims are highly contentious and generally based on debatable evidence For instance, a major problem in such studies is that there is no agreed record of past volcanic forcing - alternative records published in the literature correlate poorly. In consequence, the statistical evidence for a low frequency volcanic effect is poor (Wigley et al 1986) but not negligible (Schonwiese, 1988); since the lifetime of the aerosols in the stratosphere is only a few years, such an effect would require frequent explosive eruptions to cause long time-scale fluctuations in aerosol loading

In summary, there is little doubt that major volcanic eruptions contribute to the mterannual variability of the global temperature record. There is no convincing evidence, however, of longer time-scale effects. In the future, the effects of volcanic eruptions will continue to impose small year-to-year fluctuations on the global mean temperature. Furthermoie, a period of sustained intense volcanic activity could partially offset or delay the effects of warming due to increased concentrations of greenhouse gases. However, such a period would be plainly evident and readily allowed for in any contemporary assessment of the pi ogress of the greenhouse warming.

2.3.3	Indirect Aerosol Effects

Cloud droplets form exclusively through condensation of water vapour on cloud condensation nuclei (CCN): i.e., aerosol particles. Therefore, the size, number and the chemical composition of aerosol particles, as well as updraughts, determine the number of cloud droplets. As a consequence, continental clouds, especially over populated regions, have a higher droplet concentration (by a factor of Older 10) than those in remote marine areas. Clouds with the same vertical extent and liquid water content are calculated to have a higher short-wave albedo over continents than over the oceans (e.g., Twomey, 1977). In

other words, the more polluted an area by aerosol particles the more leflcctive the clouds This effect is most pronounced for moderately thick clouds such as marine stratocumulus and stratus clouds which cover about 25% of the Earths suiface Hence, an increased load of aerosol pirticles has the potential to mciease the albedo of the planet and thus to some extent counteiact the enhanced greenhouse effect

The strongest confirmation of this aerosol/cloud albedo connection stems from observations of clouds in the wake of ship-stack effluents Ships enhance existing cloud cover (Twomey et al , 1984), and measurably increase the reflectivities (albedo) of clouds in overcast conditions (Coakley et al , 1987) While the in-situ observations (Radke et al , 1990) have shown the expected increase in droplet numbers and decrease in droplet sizes for the contaminated clouds, they have also shown an increase in cloud liquid water content (LWC) in contradiction to the suggestion by Twomey et al , (1984) that the changes in the droplet size distribution will leave the LWC nearly unchanged Albrecht (1989) has suggested that the LWC increase could be due to the suppression of drizzle in the contaminated clouds An increase of the number of CCN therefore may have an even moie complicated influence than has been analysed

The inciease in aerosol sulphate caused by anthropogenic SO2 emissions (Section 1 Figure 1 16) may have caused an increase in the number of CCN with possible subsequent influence on cloud albedo and climate

Cess (personal communication) has reported changes in planetary albedo over cloudy skies that are consistent with a larger-scale effect of sulphate emissions Measurements from the Earth Radiation Budget Experiment satellite instruments indicate after other factors have been taken into account that the planetary albedo over low clouds decreases by a few per cent between the western and eastern North Atlantic The implication is that sulphate emissions from the east coast of North America are affecting cloud albedos downwind A similar effect can be seen in the North Pacific off the coast of Asia

There are important gaps in our understanding and too little data, so that a confident assessment of the influence of sulphur emissions on radiative foicing cannot be made Wigley (1989) has estimated a global-mean forcing change of between -0 25 and -1 25 Wm’2 from 1900 to 1985 (with all of it actually occurring in the Northern Hemisphere) Deriving a forcing history during this period presents even further difficulties so that we use, for a typical decadal forcing, the average change of -0 03 to -0 15 Wm - per decade

Reference to Figure 2 3 shows that this foicing may have contributed significantly to the total forcing particularly earlier in the centuiy at these times it may have been of a similar size, but of opposite sign to the forcing caused by

the enhanced greenhouse effect Indeed, it has been suggested that the increase in CCN of industrial origin (see Section 17 1) might explain why the Northern Hemisphere has not been warming as rapidly as the Southern Hemisphere over the last 50 years Wigley (1989) estimates that each 0 1°C increase in the twentieth century warming of the Southern Hemisphere relative to the Northern Hemisphere corresponds to a mean forcing differential of around -0 5 Wni'2, or a CCN increase of about 10%

Sulphur emissions are actively being reduced in many countries Hence even if some compensation in the total forcing is occurring because of changes in sulphate and greenhouse gases, it is not clear whether that compensation will continue in the future Because of the limited atmospheric residence time of the sulphur compounds, their possible effects on climate will be reduced as soon as their emissions are decreased A decrease in sulphur emissions would, via this theory, cause a decrease in cloud albedo The change in forcing over a decade could then be positive (although the total change from pre-industnal times would remain less than or equal to zero) Hence we are unable to estimate even the sign of future changes in forcing due to this sulphate effect

A further important point is that even if the cloud albedo increases exactly offset the forcing due to increased concentrations of greenhouse gases, this would not necessarily imply zero climate change The sulphate effect would tend to act only regionally, whilst the greenhouse forcing is global Hence regional climate change would still be possible even if the global mean perturbation to the radiation balance were to be zero

2.3.4	Surface Characteristics

The effects of desertification, salinization, temperate and tropical deforestation and urbanization on the surface albedo have been calculated by Sagan et al (1979) They calculated an absolute change in surface albedo of 6 x 10" 3 over the last 1 000 years and 1 x 10'3 over as short a time as the last 25 years Henderson-Sellers and Gormtz (1984) updated these latter calculations to a maximum albedo change over the last 25-30 years of between 3 3 and 6 4 x 10’4 From Hansen et al , (1988) the radiative forcing (in Wm-2) for a change in a land surface albedo is about

AF = 43 Ax (Ax <0 1)

where Ax is the change (as a decimal fraction) in the land albedo (The expression implicitly accounts for the fact that the land surface occupies only 30% of the total surface area of the globe)

Thus the albedo change over the last few decades will have produced a radiative forcing of 0 03 Wm’2 dt most 1 e the effects of surface albedo changes on the planetary ladiation budget are very small The effects of changes in surface chaiacteristics on water balance and surface

roughness are likely to be far more important tor the regional climate, the changes are discussed in Section 5 6

2.4	The Relative Importance of Radiative Forcing

Agents in the Future

The analyses of past trends and future projections of the changes in concentrations of greenhouse gases indicate that the ladiative forcing fiom these gases may increase by as much as 0 4-0 6 Wm’2 per decade over the next several decades As discussed in Section 2 3, decadal-scale changes in the radiative loicing can also result from other causes Natural effects on the loicing as a result of solar vailability and volcanic eiuptions are paiticulaily ielevant on decadal timescales Other potentially impoitant anthropogenic effects may lesult horn increases in the aciosol content ot the lowci atmosphcie, paiticulaily as a result ol sulphur emissions It is impoitant to consider how these additional iorcings may modify the atmosphenc ladiative forcing front that expected fiom gieenhouse gases on both decadal and longer timescales

Over the penod of a decade the other radiative forcings could extensively modify the expected ladiative forcing fiom gieenhouse gases The additional loicing could either add to subtract horn oi even largely negate the ladiative loicing from gieenhouse gases, with the eilect over any given decade possibly being quite different from that ovei othei decades Figure 2 6(a) estimates the lange of possible effects fiom solai vailability, volcanic eruptions, and man made sulphui emissions ovei a decade as contpaied with the insults using the ioui policy scenarios which give, over the next decade changes langing fiom 0 41 to 0 56 Wm -Foi solai flux vanations it is assumed that the variability ovei a decade when aveiaged ovei the eleven yeai solar cycle should be less than the longer teim change The eailiei discussion indicates that ovei a decade the solar flux vailability could modify the ladiative foicing by ± 0 1 Wm - and one laigc volcanic eiuption in a decade could cause a decease ot 0 2 Wnt’2 The global-mean effect of sulphui emissions on cloud albedos was estimated to be up to 0 15 Wm’2 pci decade but, on a decadal scale not even the sign oi the effect is certain Since both the volcanic and sulphate effects do not act globally, the possible compensations between incieased gieenhouse forcing and possible decreases from the other effects may be even greater icgionally, whilst in other regions, such as in the southern hemisphere, the impact of sulphur emissions may be very small

Figure 2.6: Comparison of different radiative forcing mechanisms for (a) a 10 year penod, and (b) a 50 yeai period in the future The greenhouse gas forcings are loi the periods 1990 2000 and 2000 2050 respectively using the four policy scenarios Foicings due to changes in solar radiation and sulphur emissions could be eithei positive or negative over the two periods

While other clfects could gieatly amplify or negate the greenhouse-gas-induccd radiative foicing ovei any given decade, the effects of such foicings ovei a longer time period should geneially be much smaller than the forcing expected from the greenhouse gases This is shown in Figure 2 6(b) loi the changes in radiative foicing oyer a 50-year period The lour policy scenauos lead to changes in forcing of between 1 3 and 3 5 Wnt’2 foi the period 2000-2050 The effects horn solar variability volcanic

eruptions and man-made sulphur emissions are likely to be much smaller The prior discussion suggests a change in radiative forcing of 0 2 Wiir- from solar variability could occur over several decades In the unlikely case of one major volcanic eiuption per decade, a resulting net decrease in radiative forcing of 0 2 Wm_- could be sustained over a 50 year period The effect of man-made sulphur emissions is again highly uncertain but using the earlier estimates it could be up to 0 75 Wm‘2 of either sign Effects on radiative forcing from changes in surface characteristics should be less than 0 1 Wm 2 over this time period

In addition to the effects from other forcings that oppose or reinforce the greenhouse gas forcing, there are also decadal-scale climate changes that can occur without any changes in the radiative forcing Non-linear interactions in the Earth-ocean-atmosphere system can result in unforced internal climatic variability (see e g Section

6 5 2) As a result of the combined effects of forced and unforced effects on climate a range of unpredictable variations of either sign will be superimposed on a trend of rising temperature

References

Albrecht B A 1989 Aerosols cloud microphysics and fractional cloudiness Science 242, 1227 1330

Ball R J and G D Robinson, 1982 The origin of haze in the Central United States and its effect on solar radiation / Appl Meteoiol 21 171 188

Bradley RS 1988 The explosive volcanic eruption signal in northern hemisphere continental temperature records Chm Change 12,221 243

Coaklev J A Jr and P Chylek 1975 The two stream approximation in radiative transfer including the angle of the incident radiation I Atmos Sei 46 249 261

Coakley J A Jr RL Bernstein and P A Durkee 1987 Effect of ship stack effluents on cloud reflectivity Science 237 1020 1022

Coulson KL 1988 Polaii cltion ancl internals of light in the citmospluic A Deep ik Publishing Hampton VA USA

Derwent RG 1990 I race gases and their relative conn ibution to the greenhouse effect Atomic Energy Research Establishment Harwell Oxon Report AERE R13716

Eddy J A 1977 Climate and the changing sun Chm Change 1, 173 190

Fisher D A C H Hales W C Wang M K W Ko and N D Sze 1990 Model calculations of the relative effects of CFCs and their replacements on global warming Naim c 344,513 516

Folland CK DE Parker and F E Kates 1984 Worldwide marine temperUurc fluctuations 1856 1981 Natmc 310,670 673

Foukal P and J Lein 1990 An empirical model of total solar irradiance variations between 1874 and 1988 Science 247, 556 558

Gilliland R L 1982 Solar volcanic and CO2 forcing of recent climatic changes Chm Change 4,111 131

Gilliland R L and S H Schneider 1984 Volcanic CO2 and solar forcing of northern and southern hemisphere surface temperatuies Natuic 310,38 41

Grassl H 1988 What are the radiative and climatic consequences of the changing concentration of atmospheric aerosol particles In I lie Changing Atmosphei e eds F S Rowland and I S A Isaksen, pp 187 199, John Wiley and Sons Ltd

Grassl H and M Newiger 1982 Changes of local planetary albedo by aerosol particles In Atmosphei ic Pollution Studies of Emit onmcntal Science 20 313 320

Hansen JE and A A Lacis 1990 Sun and dust versus the greenhouse Chm Change (submitted)

Hansen J A Lacis and M Prather, 1989 Greenhouse effect of chlorofluorocarbons and other trace gases I Geophs s Res 94, 16417 16421

Hansen J D Johnson A Lacis S Lebedeff P Lee D Rmd and G Russell 1981 Climate impacts of increasing carbon dioxide Science 213,957 966

Hansen J I Fung A Lacis D Rmd, S Lebedeff R Ruedy and G Russell 1988 Global climate changes as forecast by Goddard Institute for Space Studies Three Dimensional Model J GcophssRcs 93 9341 9364.

Hammer C U H B Clausen and W Dansgaard 1980 Greenland ice sheet evidence of postglacial volcanism and its climatic impact Natuic 288,230 235

Hough A M and R G Derwent 1990 Changes in the global concentration of tropospheric ozone due to human activities Natuic 344,645 648

Henderson-Sellers A and V Gormtz 1984 Possible climatic impacts of land cover transformations with particular emphasis on tropical deforestation Chm Change 6,231 257

Husson N 1990 Compilation of references to the spectroscopic data base for greenhouse gases WMO (To be published)

Kelly, P M and T M L Wigley 1990 The relative contribution of greenhouse and solar forcing to observed trends in global mean temperature Submitted to Natmc

Lacis A A DJ Wucbbles and J A Logan 1990 Radiative forcing of global climate changes in the vertical distribution of ozone / Gcopliss Res (to appear)

Lashof D A and D R Ahuja 1990 Relative contributions of greenhouse gas emissions to global warming Nairn c 344, 529 531

Luther FM and Y Fouquart 1984 The Intercomparison of Radiation Codes in Climate Models (ICRCCM) Woild Climate Pi ogi anime Repent WCP-93, WMO Geneva

Marshall Institute 1989 Scientific Perspectives on the Greenhouse Problem Ed F Seitz Marshall Institute Washington D C

Mass C F and D A Portman 1989 Major volcanic eruptions and climate A critical evaluation / Climate 2, 566 593

Porter S C 1987 Pattern and forcing of the northern hemisphere glaciei variations during the last millemum Quait Re \ 26, 27 48

Prather M J and R T Watson 1990 Stratospheric ozone depletion and futuie levels of atmospheric chlorine and bi online Natmc 344 729 734

Radke LT J A Coakley, Jr. and M D King 1990 Direct and icmotc sensing observations ot the ellccts ol ships on clouds S< am e (submitted lor publication)

R am a nat han, V 1988 The greenhouse theory ol climate change A test by inadvertent global experiment Sueme 240, 293-299

Ramanathan, V , R J Cicerone, H B Singh andJT Kiehl, 1985 Tiace gas liends and their potential role in climate change IGeophss Res ,90, 5547-5566

Ramanathan, V , L Callis, R Cess, J Hansen, I Isaksen, W Kuhn, A Lacis, F Luther, J Mahlman, R Reck and M Schlesinger, 1987 Climate-chemical interactions and effects ol changing atmospheric trace gases Rei Gt ophy s, 25, 1441 1482

Reid, G C 1987 Influence oi solar variability on global sea surface temperature Native 329, 142-143

Rind, D , D Pcteet and G Kukla, 1989 Can Milankovitch orbital variations initiate the growth of ice sheets in a genera] circulation model’ / Geophy s Res 94,12851 12871

Rodhe, H , 1990 A comparison ot the contribution of various gases io the greenhouse eftecl. St tent e (to appear)

Sagan, C , O B Toon and J B Pollack, 1979 Anthropogenic albedo changes and the Earth's climate Suence, 206, 1363-1368

Schneider, S H and C Mass, 1975 Volcanic dust, sunspots and temperature trends Science 190,741746

Schonwiese, CD 1988 Volcanic activity parameters and volcanism climate relationships within the recent centuries Atmosfeia 1, 141-156

SCOPE, 1986 The Greenhouse Effect Climatic Change and E\imstemi Edited by B Bohn, B R Doos, J Jager and R A Warrick, SCOPE 29, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester

Seigenthaler, U , 1983 Uptake of excess CO2 by an outcropdill usion model of the ocean J Geophys Res , 88,3599-3608.

Spaenkuch, D , 1978 The variation of the shortwave radiation balance of the Earth-atmosphere system with increasing turbidity ZMeteoiol 28,199 207

Thompson, A M , R W Stewart, M A Owens and J A Herwehe, 1989 Sensitivity ol tropospheric oxidants to global chemical and climate change Atmos Eniuon , 23, 519-532

Twomey. SA, 1977 Atmospheiic Aeiosols Elsevier, Amsterdam

Twomey, SA, M Piepgrass and TL Wolfe , 19841 An assessment of the impact of pollution on global cloud albedo. 7e//in36B, 356-366

UNEP, 1989 Scientific Assessment of Stiatospheiic Ozone, Nan obi

Wang. W C and N D Sze, 1980 Coupled effects of atmospheric NiO and 0} Earth's climate Native, 286, 589-590

Wang W-C , G-Y Shi and J T Kiehl, 1990 Incorporation of the thermal radiative el feel of CH4, N2O, CF2CI2 and CFCI3 into the NCAR Community Climate Model J Geophys Res (to appear)

Wigley T M L , 1987 Relative contributions of different trace gases to the greenhouse effect Climate Monttot, 16, 14-29

Wigley TML, 1988 The climate of the past 10000 years and the tole ol the Sun In Sendai solar and geomagnetic sanations nt the last 10000 seats edited by F R Stephenson and A W Wolfcndale 209-224. Kluwer

Wigley TML, 1989 Possible climate change due to SO2-derived cloud condensation nuclei Native , 339, 365 367

Wigley.TML and PM Kelly, 1990 Holocene climatic change, wiggles and variations 111 soldi 11 radiance

Phil Tians R Sat London A330, 547-560

Wigley TML and S C B Raper, 1990 Climatic change due to solar irradiance changes Geophss Res Lett (to appear)

Wigley, T M L , P D Jones and P M Kelly, 1986 Warm World Scenarios and the Detection of Climatic Changed Induced by Radiatively Active Gases In The Gieenhouse Effect Climatic Change and Etoss stems Edited by B Bolin, B R Doos, J Jager and R A Warrick. SCOPE 29, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester

Willson, R C and H S Hudson, 1988 Solar luminosity variations m Solar Cycle 21 Native 332,810-812

WMO 1985 Atmospheric ozone 1985 World Meteorological Organisation Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project-Repoit No 16 WMO Geneva

Wuebbles, D J, 1989 Beyond CO2 the other greenhouse gases Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , California, Report UCRL 99883, also Air and Waste Management Assoc paper 89-119 4

Wuebbles, D J , K E Grant, P S. Connell, and J E Penner, 1989 The role of atmospheric chemistry in climate change J Air Poll Conti ol Assoc , 39, 22-28

3

Processes and Modelling

U. CUBASCH, R.D. CESS

Contributors:

F. Bretherton; H. Cattle; J.T. Houghton; J.F.B. Mitchell; D. Randall; E. Roeckner; J. D. Woods; T. Yamanouchi.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary

3.1	Introduction

3.2	Climate System

3.2.1	The Atmosphere

3.2.2	The Ocean

3.2.3	The Cryosphere

3.2.4	The Biosphere

3.2.5	The Geosphere

3.2.6	Timescales

3.3	Radiative Feedback Mechanisms

3.3.1	Discussion of Radiative Feedback Mechanisms

3.3.2	Water Vapour Feedback

3.3.3	Snow-ice Albedo Feedback

3.3.4	Cloud Feedback

3.4	Predictability of the Climate System

3.5	Methods of Predicting Future Climate

3.5.1	The Palaeo-Analogue Method

73

75

75

75

76

77

77

77

77

77

77

78

78

79

80

80

83

3.5.1.1	Estimate of temperature sensitivity to CO2

changes	83

3.5.1.2	Construction of the analogue patterns	83

3.5.2	Atmospheric General Circulation	Models	84

3.5.2.1	Physical parameterizations	84

3.5.2.2	Radiation and the effect of clouds	84

3.5.2.3	Sub grid-scale transports	85

3.5.2.4	Land surface processes	85

3.5.2.5	Boundary conditions	86

3.5.3	Ocean Models	86

3.5.4	Carbon Cycle Models	86

3.5.5	Chemical Models	87

3.5.6	Coupled Models of the Atmosphere and the Ocean 87

3.5.7	Use of Models	87

3.5.7.1	Equilibrium response experiments	88

3.5.7.2	Time-dependent response experiments	88

3.6	Illustrative Equilibrium Experiments	88

3.7	Summary	89

References	90

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The climate system consists of the five components

atmosphere

ocean

cryosphere (ice)

biosphere geosphere

The fundamental process driving the global climate system is heating by incoming short-wave solar radiation and cooling by long-wave infrared radiation into space The heating is strongest at tropical latitudes, while cooling predominates at the polar latitudes of each winter hemisphere The latitudinal gradient of heating drives the large scale circulations in the atmosphere and in the ocean, thus providing the heat transfer necessary to balance the system

Many facets of the climate system are not well understood, and a significant number of the uncertainties in modelling atmospheric, cryosphenc and oceanic interactions are directly due to the representation or knowledge of interactive climate feedback mechanisms Such feedback mechanisms can cither amplify or reduce the climate response resulting from a given change of climate forcing

In older to predict changes in the climate system, numerical models have been developed which try to simulate the different feedback mechanisms and the interaction between the different components of the climate system

So far most climate simulations have been carried out with numerical Atmospheric General Circulation Models (AGCMs) which have been developed or derived from weather forecast models For investigations of climate change due to increased greenhouse gas concentrations, they have generally been run coupled with simple representations of the uppei ocean and, in some cases, with more detailed, but low resolution, dynamical models of the ocean to its full depth Relatively simple schemes

for interactive land surface temperature and soil moisture are also usually included Representations of the other elements of the climate system (land-ice, biosphere) are usually included as non-mteractive components The resolution of these models is as yet too coarse to allow more than a limited regional interpretation of the results

Unfortunately, even though this is crucial for climate change prediction, only a few models linking all the mam components of the climate system in a comprehensive way have been developed This is mainly due to a lack of computer resources, since a coupled system has to take the different timescales of the subsystems into account An atmospheric general circulation model on its own can be integrated on currently available computers for several model decades to give estimates of the variability about its equilibrium response when coupled to a global ocean model (which needs millennia to reach an equilibrium) the demands on computer time are increased by several orders of magnitude The inclusion of additional sub-systems and the refinement of resolution needed to make regional predictions demands computer speeds several orders of magnitude faster than is available on current machines

It should be noted that current simulations of climate change obtained by incomplete models may be expected to be superseded as soon as more complete models of the climate system become available

An alternative to numerical model simulations is the palaeoanalogue method (the reconstruction of past climates) Although its usefulness for climate prediction is questioned because of problems involving data coverage and the validity of past climate forcing compared with future scenarios, the method gives valuable information about the possible spectrum of climate change and it provides information for the broader calibration of atmospheric circulation models in different climate regimes

3.1	Introduction

The aim of this section is to provide background understanding of the climate system, to explain some of the technical terms used in climate research (i e , what is a transient and what is an equilibrium response), and to describe how climate change can be predicted In the limited space available to this Section it is impossible to give more than a brief description of the climate system and its prediction The discussion will therefore be limited to the most relevant aspects More detailed description are found in the references and in, for example, the books of Gates (1975) and Houghton (cd) (1984)

A section has been devoted to feedback processes which introduce the non-linearities into the climate system, and which account for many of the difficulties in predicting climate change Climate models and their technical details are discussed where relevant to subsequent Sections of the Report For more detailed information the reader is referred to the book by Washington and Parkinson (1986)

To illustrate some of the difficulties and uncertainties which arise in climate change predictions from numerical models we compare results from two independent numerical simulations at the end of the Section

3.2	Climate System

The climate system (see Figure 3 1) consists of the five components

atmosphere

ocean

cryosphere

biosphere geosphere

The fundamental processes driving the global climate system are heating by incoming short wave solar radiation and the cooling by long-wave radiation into space The heating is strongest at tropical latitudes, while cooling predominates in the polar regions during the winter of each hemisphere The latitudinal gradient of heating drives the atmosphere and ocean circulations, these provide the heat transfer necessary to balance the system (see Simmons and Bengtsson, 1984)

3.2.1	The Atmosphere

The bulk of the incoming solar radiation is absorbed not by the atmosphere but by the Earth's surface (soil, ocean, ice) Evaporation of moisture and direct heating of the surface generate a heat transfer between the surface and the atmosphere in the form of latent and sensible heat The atmosphere transports this heat meridionally, mainly via transient weather systems with a timescale of the order of days

The following processes are important in determining the behaviour of the atmospheric component of the climate system

Turbulent transfer of heat, momentum and moisture at the surface of the Earth,

The surface type (i e , its albedo), which determines the proportion of incoming to reflected solar radiation

Latent heat release when water vapour condenses, clouds, which play an important role in reflecting

Changes of solar radiation

Figure 3.1: Schematic illustration of the components of the coupled atmosphere-ocean ice-land climatic system The full arrows are examples of external processes, and the open arrows are examples of internal processes in climatic change (from Houghton, 1984)

incoming solar short-wave radiation and in absorbing and emitting long-wave radiation.

The radiative cooling and heating of the atmosphere by CCb, water vapoui, ozone and othei tiace gases.

Aerosols (such as volcanic dust), the orbital parameters, mountain ranges and the land-sea distribution.

Atmospheric processes are also influenced by a number of feedback mechanisms which involve interactions between the atmospheric processes themselves (radiation and clouds, for example) and between these processes and the underlying surface. Such feedback mechanisms are discussed in more detail in 3.3 1

The problems concerning the impact ol human activities on the greenhouse effect has bioadened in scope from a CC>2 climate problem to a trace gas climate problem (Ramanathan et al., 1987). The climatic elfects ol trace gases are strongly governed by interactions between chemistry, radiation and dynamics. The nature of the trace gas radiative heating and the importance of chemical-ladiative interactions has been aheady discussed in Section 2

3.2.2	The Ocean

The ocean also plays an essential role in the global climate system. Over half of the solar radiation reaching the Earth's surface is first absorbed by the ocean, where it is stored and redistubuted by ocean currents bcfoie escaping to the atmosphere, largely as latent heat of evapoiation, but also as long-wave radiation. The currents are driven by the exchange of momentum, heat and watei between the ocean and atmosphere. They have a complicated horizontal and veitical structure determined by the pattern of winds blowing over the sea and the distribution of continents and submeiged mountain ranges. The veitical structure of the ocean comprises three layers:

The Seasonal Boundary Layei, mixed annually from the surface, is less than 100 metres deep in the tropics and reaches hundreds of metics in the sub-polar seas (other than the North Pacific) and several kilometres in very small regions of the polar seas in most years;

The Warm Water Sphere (permanent thermocline), ventilated (i. e., exchanging heat and gases) lrom the seasonal boundary layer, is pushed down to depths of many hundreds of metres in gyres by the convergence of surface (Ekrnan) currents driven directly by the wind; and

The Cold Water Sphere (deep ocean), which fills the bottom 80% of the ocean's volume, ventilated from the seasonal boundary layer in polar seas

The ocean contains chemical and the biological mechanisms which are important in controlling carbon dioxide in the climate system. Carbon dioxide is transferred

from the atmosphere into the interior of the ocean by the physical pump mechanism (desciibed in the previous Section) caused by diiferences in the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the ocean and the lowest layers of the atmosphere. Furthermore the annual ventilation of the seasonal boundary layei from the surface mixed-layer controls the efficiency of the biological pump by which ocean plankton convert dissolved carbon dioxide into particulate carbon, which sinks into deep water. These two pumps are responsible for extracting carbon dioxide from the global carbon cycle for periods in excess of a hundred yeais. The ocean branch of the carbon cycle involves a flux of carbon dioxide from the air into the sea at locations where the surface mixed layer has a partial pressure of CO2 lower than the atmosphere and vice versa. Mixed-layer partial pressure of CO2 is depressed by enhanced solubility in cold water and enhanced plankton production during the spring bloom. The rate of gas exchange depends on the airsea difference in partial pressure of CO2 and a coefficient which increases with wind speed.

The lollowing processes control the the climate response of the ocean.

The small-scale (of order 50 km) transient eddies inside the ocean influence the structure of permanent gyres and streams and their interaction with submerged mountain ranges. The eddies also control the horizontal dispersion of chemicals (such as CO2) dissolved in seawater.

The small-scale (tens of kilometres) patches of deep winter convection in the polar seas and the northernmost part of the North Atlantic, which transport heat and dissolved carbon dioxide below one kilometre into the deep reservoir of the cold water sphere, and the slow currents which circulate the newly implanted water around the world ocean.

The more extensive mechanism of thermocline ventilation by which some of the water in the surface mixed-layer flows from the seasonal boundary layer into the warm water sphere reservoir of the ocean, which extends for several hundreds of metres below most of the ocean's surface area.

The global transport of heat, freshwater and dissolved chemicals carried by ocean currents which dictate the global distributions of temperature, salinity, sea-ice and chemicals at the sea surface. Fluctuations in the large-scale circulation have modulated these patterns over years and decades. They also control the regional variations in sea surface properties which al feet climate at this scale.

The biological pump in the seasonal boundary layer by which microscopic plants and animals (the plankton) consume some of the carbon dioxide dissolved in the seawater and sequester the carbon in the deep ocean

away from the short term (up to a hundred years) interactions between ocean and atmosphere

3.2.3	The Cryosphere

The terrestrial cryosphere can be classified as follows (Untersteiner, 1984)

Seasonal snow cover, which responds rapidly to atmospheric dynamics on timescales of days and longer In a global context the seasonal heat storage in snow is small The primary influence of the cryosphere comes from the high albedo of snow covered surfaces

Sea ice, which affects climate on time scales of seasons and longer This has a similar effect on the surface heat balance as snow on land It also tends to decouple the ocean and atmosphere since it inhibits the exchange of moisture and momentum In some regions it influences the formation of deep water masses by salt extrusion during the freezing period and by the generation of fresh water layers in the melting period

Ice sheets of Greenland and the Antarctic, which can be considered as quasi-pcrmancnt topographic features They contain 80% of the existing fresh water on the globe, thereby acting as a long term reservon in the hydrological cycle Any change in size will therefore influence the global sea level

Mountain glaciers are a small part of the cryosphere They also represent a freshwater reservoir and can therefore influence the sea level They are used as an important diagnostic tool for climate change since they respond rapidly to changing environmental conditions

Permafrost affects surface ecosystems and river discharges It influences the thermohaline circulation of the ocean

3.2.4	The Biosphere

The biosphere on land and in the oceans (discussed above) controls the magnitude of the fluxes of several greenhouse gases including CO2 and methane, between the atmosphere, the oceans and the land The processes involved are sensitive to climatic and environmental conditions, so any change in the climate or the environment (e g , increases in the atmospheric abundance of CO?) will influence the atmospheric abundance of these gases A detailed description of the feedbacks and their respective magnitudes can be found in Section 10

3.2	5 The Geosphere

The land processes play an important part in the hydrological cycle These concern the amount of fresh watei stoied in the ground as soil moistuie (thcicby

interacting with the biosphere) and in underground reservoirs, or transported as run-off to different locations where it might influence the ocean circulation, particularly in high latitudes The soil interacts with the atmosphere by exchanges of gases, aerosols and moisture, and these are influenced by the soil type and the vegetation, which again are strongly dependent on the soil wetness Our present knowledge about these strongly interactive processes is limited and will be the target of future research (see Section H)

3.2.6	Timescales

While the atmosphere reacts very rapidly to changes in its forcing (on a timescale of hours or days), the ocean reacts more slowly on timescales ranging from days (at the surface layer) to millennia in the greatest depths The ice cover reacts on timescales of days for sea ice regions to millennia for ice sheets The land processes react on timescales of days up to months, while the biosphere reacts on time scales from hours (plankton growth) to centuries (tree-growth)

3.3	Radiative Feedback Mechanisms

3.3.1	Discussion of Radiative Feedback Mechanisms

Many facets of the climate system are not well understood, and a significant number of the uncertainties in modelling atmospheric, cryospheric and oceanic interactions are directly due to interactive climate feedback mechanisms They can either amplify or damp the climate response resulting liom a given climate forcing (Cess and Pottei, 1988) For simplicity, emphasis will here be directed towards global-mean quantities, and the interpretation of climate change as a two-stage process foicing and response This has proved useful in interpreting climate feedback mechanisms in general circulation models It should, in fact, be emphasized that the conventional concept of climate feedback applies only to global mean quantities and to changes from one equilibrium climate to another

As discussed in Section 2, the radiative forcing of the surface-atmosphcic system AQ is evaluated by holding all other climate parameters fixed, with G = 4 Wm‘2 for an instantaneous doubling of atmospheric CO2 It readily follows (Cess et al , 1989) that the change in surface climate, expressed as the change in global-mean surface temperature ATs, is related to the radiative forcing by ATs - X x AQ, where X is the climate sensitivity parameter

1

X - ___________________

AF/ATs AS/ATs

where F and S denote respectively the global-mean emitted infraicd and net downward solar fluxes at the Top Of the

Atmosphere (TOA) Thus AF and AS are the climatechange TOA responses to the radiative forcing AQ An increase in X thus represents an increased climate change due to a given radiative forcing AQ (= AF - AQ)

The definition of radiative forcing requires some clarification Strictly speaking, it is defined as the change in net downward radiative flux at the tropopause, so that for an instantaneous doubling of CCh this is approximately 4 Win’2 and constitutes the radiative heating of the surface-troposphere system If the stratosphere is allowed to respond to this forcing, while the climate parameters ol the surface-troposphere system are held fixed, then this 4 Win 2 f|ux change also applies at the top of the atmosphere It is in this context that ladiative forcing is used in this section

A doubling of atmospheric CCh serves to illustrate the use of X lor evaluating feedback mechanisms Figure 3 2 schematically depicts the global radiation balance Averaged over the year and over the globe there is 340 Wnr- of incident solar radiation at the TOA Of this ioughly 30% oi 100 Wm 2 iS icflectcd by the suitace -atmosphere system Thus the climate system absoibs 240 Wnr- ol solar radiation, so that under equilibnum conditions it must emit 240 Wm’2 of infrared radiation The CO2 radiative forcing constitutes a reduction in the emitted infrared radiation, since this 4 Wm_2 forcing icpicsents a heating of the climate system Thus the CO2

Global Radiation Budget

	Absorbed Emitted
Instantaneous CO2 doubling	240Wm-2 236Wrrr2
New Equilibrium with no other change	240 Wm 2	240 Wm 2

figure 3 2’ Schematic illustration of the global radiation budget it the top ot the atmosphere

doubling results in the climate system absorbing 4 Wm_2 more cncigy than it emits, and global warming then occurs so as to mcicase the emitted iadiation in order to reestablish the Eaiths radiation balance If this warming produced no change in the climate system other than temperature, then the system would return to its original radiation balance, with 240 Wm~2 both absorbed and emitted In this absence of climate feedback mechanisms, AF/ATs = 3 3 Wrn-2 K'l (Cess et al, 1989 ) while AS/ATs = 0, so that X = 0 3 Km2 W' It in turn follows that ATs = X x AQ = 1 2°C If it were not for the fact that this warming mtioduccs numerous interactive feedback mechanisms, then ATs = 1 2°C would be quite a robust global-mean quantity Unfortunately, such feedbacks introduce considerable uncertainties into ATs estimates Three of the commonly discussed feedback mechanisms are described in the following sub-sections

3	3.2 Water Vapour Feedback

The best understood feedback mechanism is water vapour feedback and this is intuitively easy to comprehend For illustrative purposes a doubling of atmospheric CO2 will again be consideicd The ensuing global warming is, of course, the result of CO2 being a greenhouse gas This warming, however, produces an interactive effect, the warmer atmosphere contains more water vapour, itself a giccnhouse gas Thus an mciease in one greenhouse gas (CO2) induces an increase in yet another greenhouse gas (water vapour), resulting in a positive (amplifying) feedback mechanism

To be more specific on this point, Raval and Ramanathan (1989) have recently employed satellite data to quantify the temperature dependence of the water vapour greenhouse ellect From then results it readily follows (Cess, 1989) that watei vapour leedback reduces AF/ATs from the prior value ol 3 3 Wm -K-' to 2 3 Wm‘2 K-' This in turn increases A irom 0 3 Km2 W"' to 0 43 Km^ W'l and thus increases the global warming from ATs = 1 2°C to ATs = 1 7°C There is yet a further amplification caused by the increased water vapour Since water vapour also absorbs solar radiation, water vapour feedback leads to an additional heating of the climate system through enhanced absorption of solar radiation In terms of AS/ATs as appears within the expression for X, this results in AS/ATs = 0 2Wm‘2 K * (Cess et al, 1989), so that X is now 0 48 Km2 W‘* while ATs = 1 9°C The point is that water vapour feedback has amplified the initial global warming of 1 2°C to 1 9°C, 1 e . an amplification factor of 1 6

3.3.3	Snow-Ice Albedo Feedback

An additional well-known positive feedback mechanism is snow-ice albedo leedback, by which a warmer Earth has less snow and ice cover resulting in a less reflective planet

which in turn absorbs more solar radiation For simulations in which the carbon dioxide concentration of the atmosphere is increased, general circulation models produce polar amplification of the warming in winter, and this is at least partially ascribed to snow-ice albedo feedback The real situation, however, is probably more complex as, for example, the stability of the polar atmosphere in winter also plays a part Illustrations of snow-ice albedo feedback, as produced by general circulation models, will be given in Section 3 5 It should be borne in mind, however, that there is a need to diagnose the interactive nature of this feedback mechanism more fully

3.3.4	Cloud Feedback

Feedback mechanisms related to clouds are extremely complex To demonstrate this, it will be useful to first consider the impact of clouds upon the present climate Summarized in Table 3 1 are the radiative impacts of clouds upon the global climate system for annual mean conditions These radiative impacts refer to the effect of clouds relative to a 'clear-sky Earth, as will shortly be described this is termed cloud-radiative forcing

The presence of clouds heats the climate system by 31 Wm - through reducing the TOA infrared emission Note the similarity to trace-gas iadiative forcing, which is why this impact is referred to as cloud radiative forcing Although clouds contribute to the greenhouse warming of the climate system, they also produce a cooling through the reflection and reduction in absorption of solar radiation As demonstrated in Table 3 1, the latter process dominates over the former, so that the net effect of clouds on the annual global climate system is a 13 Wm-- radiative cooling As discussed below with respect to cloud feedback components, cloud-radiative forcing is an integrated effect governed by cloud amount, cloud vertical distribution, cloud optical depth and possibly the cloud droplet distribution (Wigley, 1989, Charlson et al, 1987)

Although clouds produce net cooling of the climate system, this must not be construed as a possible means of

Table 3.1: Inflated, sola/ and net cloud-iadiatixe foiling (CRF) These ai e annual-mean values

Infrared CRF	31 Wm-2
Solar CRF	. 44 Wm-2
Net CRF	- 13 Wm-2

offsetting global warming due to increasing greenhouse gases As discussed in detail by Cess et al (1989), cloud feedback constitutes the change in net CRF associated with a change in climate Choosing a hypothetical example, if climate warming caused by a doubling of CO2 were to result in a change in net CRF from 13 Witt 2 to -11 Wm--, then this increase in net CRF of 2 Wm’2 would amplily the 4 Wm_2 initial CO2 radiative forcing and would so act as a positive feedback mechanism It is emphasized that this is a hypothetical example, and there is no a pi 1011 means of determining the sign of cloud feedback To emphasize the complexity ol this feedback mechanism, three contributory processes are summarized as follows

Cloud Amount: If cloud amount decreases because of global warming, as occurs in typical general circulation model simulations, then this decrease reduces the infrared greenhouse effect attributed to clouds Thus as the Earth warms it is able to emit infrared radiation more efficiently, moderating the warming and so acting as a negative climate feedback mechanism But there is a related positive feedback, the solar radiation absorbed by the climate system increases because the diminished cloud amount causes a reduction of leflected solar radiation by the atmosphere There is no simple way ol appraising the sign of this feedback component

Cloud Altitude: A vertical redistribution of clouds will also induce feedbacks For example, if global warming displaces a given cloud layer to a higher and colder region of the atmosphere, this will produce a positive feedback because the colder cloud will emit less radiation and thus have an enhanced greenhouse effect

Cloud Water Content There has been considerable recent speculation that global warming could increase cloud water content thereby resulting in brighter clouds and hence a negative component ol cloud feedback Cess et al (1989) have recently suggested that this explanation is probably an oversimplification In one case, they demonstrated that this negative solar feedback induces a compensating positive infrared feedback In a more recent study they further indicate that in some models the net effect might thereby be that ol positive feedback (see also Schlesinger and Roeckner, 1988, Roeckner et al 1987)

The above discussion clearly illustrates the multitude of complexities associated with cloud feedback and the uncertainties due to this feedback will furthei be emphasized in Section 3 5 In that both cloud and snow ice albedo feedbacks are geogiaphical in nature then these feedback mechanisms can only be addiesscd through the use of three-dimensional numencal circulation models

3.4	Predictability Of The Climate System

The prediction of change in the climate system due to changes in the forcing is called climate iorecasting In the climate system the slow components (for example the oceanic circulation) are altered by the fast components (for example the atmosphere) (Hasselmann, 1976, Mikolajewic7 and Maier Reimer 1990) which again are influenced by the slow components, so that the complete system shows a considerable vauance just by an inteiaction of all components involved This effect is an illustration of "natural vanabihty

Taking the climate system as a whole we note that some elements of the system are chaotic viewed on a centuiy to millennium time scale, while other paits aie remaikably stable on those time scales The existence of these (in the time fiame considered) stable components allows piediction oi global change despite the existence of the chaotic elements The chaotic elements of the climate system aie the weather systems in the atmospheie and in the ocean

The weathei systems in the atmospheie have such a large hon/ontal scale that it is necessaiy to treat the whole ol the atmosphciic circulation as chaotic, nevertheless there are stable elements in the atmosphere as witnessed by the smooth seasonal cycle in such phenomena as the temperatuic distributions ovei the continents, the monsoon stoim tracks, inter-tropical convergence /one etc That stability gives us hope that the response of the atmospheric climate (including the statistics of the chaotic weathei systems) to greenhouse loicing will itself be stable and that the inteiactions between the atmospheie and the othei elements of the climate system will also be stable even though the mechanisms of inteiaction depend on the weathei systems

This leads to the common assumption used in climate piediction that the climate system is in equihbnum with its loicing That means, as long as its foicing is constant and the slowly varying components altei only slightly in the time scale consideied. the mean state of the climate system will be stable and that il there is a change in the forcing, the mean state will change until it is again in balance with the loicing This state is described as an equilibrium state the tiansition between one mean and another mean state is called a tiansient state

Flic time-scale of the tiansition period is determined by the ad|ustment time of the slowest climate system component, i e the ocean The stable ('quasi stationary") behavioui of the climate system gives us the opportunity to detect changes by taking time averages Because the internal vai lability of the system is so high the averaging inlet sal has to be long compaied to the chaotic fluctuations to detect a statistically significant signal which can be atti ibuted to the external forcing

A number of statistical test have been devised to optimize the detection of climate change signals (v Storch & Zwiers, 1988, Zwieis, 1988, Hasselmann, 1988, Santer and Wigley, 1990) (see Section 8)

Studies of the completed change from one mean state to another are called equilibrium response' studies Studies of the time evolution of the climate change due to an altered forcing, which might also be time dependent, are called transient response experiments

The weather systems in the ocean have much smaller horizontal scales (less than one hundred kilomcties) than in the atmosphere leaving the large-scale features of the world ocean circulation to be non-chaotic The success of classical dynamical occanogiaphy depends on that fact Obseivations of the pencilation of transient tracers into the ocean show that the large-scale ocean currents are stable ovei periods of several decades Palaco-oceanographic evidence shows that the currents and gyres adjusted smoothly to the ice age cycle That evidence and theoietical undeistanding of the large-scale ocean cnculation suggests that we aie indeed dealing, in the ocean, with a predictable system at least on timescales of decades The question is whether the existence of picdictability in the ocean component of the Eaith s climate system makes the system predictable as a whole However, this seems to be a leasonablc working hypothesis, which receives some support from the smooth transient response simulated by coupled ocean-atmosphere models (see Section 6)

3.5	Methods Of Predicting Future Climate

Two appioaches have been taken to predict the future climate

a)	the analogue method , which tries to estimate luture climate change from reconstructions of past climates using palaeo-climatic data,

b)	climate simulations with numerical models (GCM s) of the atmospheric general circulation, which have been derived from weather forecast models They include representations of the other elements of the climate system (using ocean models, land surface models, etc) which have varying degrees of sophistication A comprehensive list of the models employed and the research groups involved can be found in Table 3 2(a) and (b)

Table 3.2(a): Summan of tesults ft om t>lobal mixed lasei ocean atmosplici e models used m ec/iuhbi mm 2 i CO2 c xpei intents

E N T  R Y	Group	Investigators	Year	RESOLUTION				Ocean Heal Transport	Cloud	Cloud  Properties	AT  (°C)	A P  (%)	COMMENTS
				No of waves or °lat x "long	No of Vertical Layers	Diurnal  Cycle	Conv ection						
A.	Fixed, zonally averaged cloud;		no ocean heat transport										
1	GFDL	Manabe & Stouffer	1980	R15	9	N	MCA	N	FC	F	2 0	3 5	Based on 4 x CO2 simulation
3		Wetherald & Manabe	1986 8	R15	9	N	MCA	N	FC	F	3 2	n/a	
B.	Variable	cloud; no ocean heat	transport										
3	OSU	Schlesinger & Zhao	1989	4° x 5"	2	N	PC	N	RH	F	2 8	8	
4			1989	4’ x 5	2	N	PC	N	RH	F	4 4	1 1	As (3) but with revised clouds
5	MRI	Noda & Tokioka	1989	4° x 5"	5	Y	PC	N	RH	F	4 3 *	7 *	* Equilibrium not reached
6	NCAR	Washington & Meehl	1984	R15	9	N	MCA	N	RH	F	3 5 *	7 *	* Excessive ice Estimate AT = 4°C at equilibrium
7			1989	R15	9	N	MCA	N	RH	F	4 0	8	As (6) but with revised albedos for sea-ice, snow
8	GFDL	Wetherald & Manabe	1986 8	R15	9	N	MCA	N	RH	F	4 0	9	As (2) but with variable cloud
C	Variable	cloud; prescribed oceanic heat		transport									
9	AUS	Gordon & Hunt	1989	R21	4	Y	MCA	Y	RH	F	4 0	7	
10	G1SS	Hansen et al	1981	8° x 10"	7	Y	PC	Y	RH	F	3 9	n/a	
1 1		Hansen et al	1984	8° x 10°	9	Y	PC	Y	RH	F	4 2	1 1	
12		Hansen et al	1984	8" x 10"	9	Y	PC	Y	RH	F	4 8	13	As (1 1) but with more sea-ice control
1 3	GFDL	Wetherald & Manabe	1989 t	R15	9	N	MCA	Y	RH	F	4 0	8	
14	MGO	Meleshko et al	1990	T21	9	N	PC	Y	RH	F	n/a	n/a	Simulation in progress
1 5	UKMO	Wilson & Mitchell	1987	5° x 7 5°	1 1	Y	PC	Y	RH	F	5 2	15	
16		Mitchell & Warnlow	1987	5° x 7 5°	1 1	Y	PC	Y	RH	F	5 2	1 5	As (15) but with four revised surface schemes
17		Mitchell et al	1989	5° x 7 5°	1 1	Y	PC	Y	CW	F	2 7	6	As (16) but with cloud water scheme
IS			1989	5" x 7 5"	1 1	Y	PC	Y	CW	F	3 2	8	As (17) but with alternative ice formulation
19			1989	5° x 7 5°	1 1	Y	PC	Y	CW	V	1 9	3	As (17) but with variable cloud radiative properties
D.	High Resolution												
20	ccc	Boer et al	1989	T32	10	Y	MCA	Y	RH	V	3 5	4	* Soft convective adjustment
21	GFDL	Wetherald & Manabe	1989 t	R30	9	N	MCA	*	RH	F	4 0	8	» SSTs prescribed, changes prescribed from (13)
22	UKMO	Mitchell et al	1989	2 5°x3 75°	1 1	Y	PC	Y	CW	F	3 5	9	As (18) but with gravity wave drag

All models are global with realistic geography, a mixed-layer ocean, and a seasonal cycle of insolation Except where stated, results are the equilibrium response to doubling CCH

R T	= Rhomboidal/Tnangular truncation in spectral space	AT	= Equilibrium surface temperature change on doubling COs	AP	= Percentage change in precipitation
N	= Not included	Y	= Included	MCA	= Moist convective adjustment
PC	= Pciictritive convection	CA	= Convective adjustment	CW	= Cloud water
FC	= Fixed cloud	RH	= Condensation or relative humidity based cloud	V	= Variable cloud radiative properties
F	= Fixed cloud radiative properties	-	= Personal communication	n/a	= Not available
C.I DL	= Geophysical Tluid Dynamics Laboratory Princeton USA	NCAR	= National Center for Atmospheric Research Boulder CO USA	MRI	= Meteorological Research Institute Japan
MGO	= Mam Geophysical Observatory Leningrad USSR	CCC	= Canadian Climate Center	UKMO	= Meteorological Office United Kingdom
\LS	= CS1RO Australia				

Table 3.2(b): Summary of experiments carried out with global coupled ocean-atmosphere models

E N T R  Y	Group	RESOLUTION								COMMENTS
		Investigators	Year	No. of  Spectral  Waves	Atmos. Levels	Diurnal  Cycle	Convection	Ocean Levels	Cloud	
1.	GFDL	Stouffer et al.	1989	R15	9	N	RH	12	MCA	100 Years, 1% CO2 increase compounded.
2.	NCAR	Washington & Meehl	1989	R15	9	N	RH	4	FC	30 Years, 1% CO2 increased linear.
3.	MPI	Cubasch et al.	1990	T21	19	Y	PC	1 1	CW	25 Years, instantaneous CO2 doubling.
4.	UHH	Oberhuber et al.	1990	T21	19	Y	PC	9	CW	25 Years, instantaneous CO2 doubling.

All models are global, with realistic geography and a seasonal cycle of insolation.

R,T	= Number of waves in spectral space;	Y	= Included;
N	= Not included;	PC	= Penetrative convection;
MCA	= Moist convective adjustment;	CW	= Cloud water;
CA	= Convective adjustment ;	V	= Variable cloud radiative properties.
FC	= Fixed cloud;		
GFDL	= Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory,Princeton, USA;	UHH	= Met Institute, University of Hamburg, FRG;
MPI	= Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Hamburg, FRG;	NCAR	= National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Co, USA.

3.5.1	The Palaeo-Analogue Method

This method has two distinct and rather independent parts The first derives an estimate of global temperature sensitivity to atmospheric CCh concentrations based on estimates of CO2 concentrations at various times in the past and the corresponding global average temperatures, adjusted to allow for past changes in albedo and solar constant In the second part regional patterns of climate are reconstructed for selected past epochs, and they are regarded as analogues of future climates under enhanced greenhouse conditions For a further discussion of the method, see for example Budyko and Izrael (1987)

3	511 Estimate of tempei atm e sensitix ity to CO2 changes There are three stages (Budyko ct al , 1987)

I)	determining the global mean changes for past palaeoclimates This is done for four periods (Early Pliocene, early and middle Miocene, Palaeocene-Eocene and the Cretaceous) The temperature changes are based on isotopic temperatures obtained by Emiliani (1966) and maps derived by Sinitsyn (1965,1967) (see Budyko, 1982)

II)	subtracting the temperature change attributed to changes in the solar constant which is assumed to have increased by 5% every billion years, and to changes in surface albedo A 1% increase in solar constant is assumed to raise the global mean surface temperature by 1 4°C The changes in albedo are derived from the ratio of land to ocean, and each 0 01 reduction in albedo is assumed to have raised global mean temperature by 2°C These corrections contribute to between 25% and 50% of the total change

III)	relating the residual warming to the estimated change in atmospheric CO2 concentrations The CO2 concentrations aic denved from a carbon cycle model The concentrations during the Eocene are estimated to be more than five times greater than present, and for the Cretaceous nine times greater (Budyko et al , 1987) On the other hand Shackleton (1985) argued that it is possible to constrain the total CO2 in the ocean, and suggests that atmospheric CO2 concentrations were unlikely to have been more than double today's value

The result is a sensitivity of 3 0°C for a doubling of CO2, with a possible range of ± 1 °C, which is very similar to that obtained on the basis of numerical simulations (Section 5)

3 5 12 Consti lie tion of the analogue pattei ns

In their study, Budyko et al (1987) used the mid-Holocene (5-6 kbp) the Last Interglacial (Eennan or Mikulino,125 kbp) and the Pliocene (3-4 mbp) as analogues for future climates January, July and mean annual tempei atures and

mean annual precipitation were reconstiucted for each of the above three epochs (see Figuies 7 3, 7 4 and 7 5) Estimates of the mean temperatures over the Northern Hemisphere exceeded the tempei ature at the end of the pre-mdustnal period (the 19th century) by approximately 1°, 2° and 3-4°C during the mid-Holocene, Eennan and Pliocene respectively These periods were chosen as analogues of future climate for 2000, 2025 and 2050 respectively

Although the nature of the forcing during these periods was probably different, the relative values of the mean latitudinal temperature change in the Northern Hemisphere for each epoch were similar in each case (Figure 3 3) Note however that the observational coverage was rather limited, especially for the Eemian when the land-based data came essentially from the Eastern Hemisphere (see Section 7 2 2) Correlations were also calculated between estimated temperature anomalies for 12 regions of the Northern Hemisphere in each of the three epochs These were found to be statistically significant in most cases, despite the limited quality and quantity of data in the earlier epochs

(a)

j 1	1 1 1 1 1 1

10N	30N	50N	70N

The considerable similarity between the temperature anomaly maps lor the three different epochs suggests that the regional temperature anomaly changes are, to a first approximation, directly proportional to increasing mean global temperature If this is true., then the regional distributions of surlace air temperature anomalies are analogous to each other and the similarities between these maps also suggest that the empirical methods tor estimating the spatial temperature distribution with global warming may be relatively robust

Similarly, annual mean precipitation changes have been reconstructed, though the patterns in the mid Holocene dillci from those found tor the other two periods (see Section 5 4, Section 7 2 2)

When reconstructions of past climate conditions are accurate and thorough, they can provide relatively reliable estimates of self-consistent spatial patterns of climatic changes Weaknesses in developing these relationships can arise because of uncertainties

i) in icconstructing past climates

n) in extending limited areal coverage to global scales m) in interpreting the effects of changing orography and equilibrium versus non-equilibrium conditions

iv) in determining the relative influences of the various factors that have caused the past climatic changes

3.5.2	Atmospheric General Circulation Models

Geneial circulation models are based on the physical conscivation laws which describe the redistribution of momentum, heat and water vapour by atmospheric motions All of these processes aic loimulatcd in the pnmitive equations which describe the bchavioui of a lluid (air or water) on a rotating body (the Eaith) undei the influence of a differential heating (the temperatuie contrast between equator and pole) caused by an external heat souice (the Sun) These governing equations are non-hncai paitial dilleiential equations whose solution cannot be obtained except by numcucal methods These numeucal methods subdivide the atmosphere vcitically into discrete layeis wheiein the vanablcs aic earned and computed Foi each layei the hon/ontal vanations ol the piedicted quantities aie deteimined cither at disciete gnd points ovei the Eaith as m gnd point (limte ditteience) models or by a finite numbei oi ptescnbed mathematical lunctions as in spectial models The honzontal iesolution of a typical atmosphenc model used lor climate studies is lllustialed by its lepiesentation ot land and sea shown in Figuie 3 4

I he x allies of the piedicted vanables (wind tempeiatuie humiditx suiiace piessuie lainiall etc ) loi each laxei (including the suitace) and gnd point (oi mathematical function) aie deteimined liom the goxeinmg equation by matching (mtegiating) loiwaid in time in discictc time steps slatting liom some gixen initial conditions Io

Figure 3.4: The model land sea mask for a typical climate model

(T21, ECHAM, after Cubasch et al, 1989)

prevent the solution from becoming numerically unstable, the time step must be made smaller than a value that depends on the speed of the fastest moving disturbance (wave), the the grid size (or smallest resolved wavelength), and the integration method

The spatial resolution of GCM's is constrained for practical reasons by the speed and memory capacity of the computer used to perform the numerical integrations Increasing the resolution not only increases the memory required (linearly for vertical resolution, quadratically for horizontal resolution), but also generally requires a reduction in the integration time step Consequentially, the computer time required increases rapidly with increasing resolution Typical models have a horizontal resolution of 300 to 1000 km and between 2 and 19 vertical levels These resolutions are sufficient to represent large-scale features of the climate, but allow only a limited interpretation ot results on the regional scale

3 5 2 1 Physical paianutei rations

Due to their limited spatial resolution, GCM's do not (and will not with any foreseeable increase of resolution) resolve sevcial physical processes of importance to climate However the statistical effects of these sub grid-scale processes on the scales i esolved by the GCM have to be incoipoiated into the model by relating them to the iesolvcd scale variables (wind, tempciaturc, humidity and surlace pressure) themselves Such a process is called paiameti ization, and is based on both obsei vational and theoietical studies Figure 3 5 shows the physical processes parameterized in a typical GCM, and then interactions

I > 2 2 Radiation and the effect of c lands

The paiametnzation of ladiation is possibly the most important issue lor climate change expei intents, since it is thiough ladiation that the effects of the gicenhouse gases aie lianslened into the geneial ciiculalion A radiation paiametnzation scheme calculates the radiative balance of

Figure 3.5: The processes parametrized in a numerical atmosphere model (ECMWF) and their interaction The thickness of the arrows indicates the strength of the interaction (from Houghton 1984)

the incoming solar radiation and the outgoing terrestrial long-wave radiation and, as appropriate, the reflection, emission and absorption of these fluxes in the atmosphere Absorption and emission are calculated in several broad spectral bands (for reasons of economy) taking into account the concentration of different absorbers and emitters like CO2, water vapour, ozone and aerosols

One sensitive part in any radiation scheme is the calculation of the radiative effect of clouds In early GCM experiments clouds were prescribed using observed cloud climatologies (fixed cloud (FC) experiments), and were not allowed to alter during the experiments with (for example) changed CO2 concentration Later schemes contained interactive cloud parametrizations of various soph istication, but mostly based on an estimate of the cloud amount from the relative humidity (RH experiments) Only the most advanced schemes calculate the variation of cloud optical properties by the cloud water content (CW experiments) Capital letters in brackets indicate abbreviations used in Table 3 2 (a) and 3 2 (b)

The seasonal variation of the solar insolation is included in almost all experiments, but a diuinal cycle is omitted in

many simulations Climate experiments run without a seasonal cycle are limited in scope and their reliability for climate change experiments is therefore doubtful The inclusion of the diurnal cycle improves the realism of some feedback mechanisms and therefore the quality of the climate simulations

3 5 2 3 Sub gi id-sc ale ti anspoi ts

Most of the solar radiation absorbed by the climate system is absorbed at the surface This energy becomes available for driving the atmospheric general circulation only after it has been transferred to the atmosphere through the planetary boundary layer (PBL), primarily by small-scale turbulent and convective fluxes of sensible and latent heat, but also by net long-wave radiative exchange On the other hand, the general circulation is slowed down by frictional dissipation which basically takes place in the PBL through vertical transport of momentum by turbulent eddies

In most GCMs the turbulent fluxes of heat, water vapour and momentum at the surface are calculated from empirical bulk formulae with stability dependent transfer coefficients The fluxes at the PBL top (at a fixed height generally) are either neglected or parametrized from simple mixed-layer theory In GCMs that resolve the PBL, the eddy diffusion approach is generally employed Considerable efforts are made to incorporate into the PBL parametrizations the effects of cloud, vegetation and sub grid-scale terrain height

Cumulus convection in a vertically unstable atmosphere is one of the main heat producing mechanisms at scales which are unresolvable in GCMs A common procedure is to adjust the temperature and water vapour profile to a conditionally stable state (Moist Convective Adjustment MCA) The second class of cumulus parametenzations often employed in GCMs is based on a moisture convergence closure (KUO) Other GCMs use Penetrative Convection (PC) schemes to mix moist conditionally unstable air from lower model layers with dry air aloft The question of how sophisticated convective para-meterizations in GCMs need be, and how much the sensitivity of climate change experiments depends on their formulation is still open

3 5 2 4 Land sin fac e pi oc esses

Another important parametrization is the transfer of heat and water within the soil, for instance the balance between evaporation and precipitation, snow melt, storage of water in the ground and river runoff This parametrization is of extieme relevance for climate change predictions since it shows how local climates may change from humid to arid and vice versa depending on global circulation changes It fuithcrmore reflects, in some of the more sophisticated schemes the changes that could occur through alterations in sin face vegetation and land-use

Most soil moisture schemes used to date are based either on the so-called “bucket” method or the lorce-restore method In the former case, soil moisture is available from a single reservoir, or thick soil layer When all the moisture is used up, evaporation ceases In the latter method, two layers of soil provide moisture for evaporation, a thin, nearsurface layer which responds rapidly to precipitation and evaporation, and a thick, deep soil layei acting as a icservoir If the surface layer dries out, deep soil moisture is mostly unavailable for evaporation and evaporation iatcs tail to small values However, in the presence ol vegetation, realistic models use the deep soil layei as a source of moisture for evapotranspiration

At any given gnd-point ovei land, a balance between piecipitation, evaporation, runoff and local accumulation of soil moisture is evaluated If precipitation exceeds evaporation, then local accumulation will occur until salutation is achieved After this, runoil is assumed and the excess water is removed The availability of this iunoff as liesh watei input to the ocean has been allowed lor in ocean models only recently (Cubasch ct al , 1990) Most models dilfei in the amount ol lreshwatei icquned foi saturation, and few treat more than one soil type The lorce-restore method has recently been extended to include a tange of soil types by Noilham and Planton (1989)

f 52 5 Boundaiy conditions

To dcteimine a unique solution of the model equations, it is necessaiy to specify a set of upper and lower boundary conditions These arc

input of solar radiation (including temporal variation) at the top ol the atmosphere,

oiogiaphy and land sea distribution, albedo of bare land, suilace roughness, vegetation chaiacteristics

The lower boundary over the sea is either piescnbed liom climatological data or, as this is not veiy appiopnate toi climate change experiments it has to be calculated by an ocean model As comprehensive ocean models are expensive to iun (see Section 3 5 3) the most commonly used ocean model coupled to atmospheie models is the mixed-layei model This model describes the uppeimost layei ol the ocean wheie the oceanic tempeiatuie is lelatively umioim with depth It is tiequcntly modelled as a simple slab loi which a fixed depth ol the mixed layer is piescnbed and the oceanic heat stotage is calculated the oceanic heat tianspoit is either neglected oi is earned only within the mixeel layei oi is piescnbed horn climatology Sea ice extents aie deteimined inteiactively usually with a vanant ot the theimodvnamic sea ice model due to Semtnei (1976) Such an ocean model evidently has stiong limitations loi studies oi climate change paiticulaily as it

does not allow for the observed lags tn heat storage of the upper ocean to be tepresented Variations of mixed-layer depth, oceanic heat flux convergence, and exchanges with the deep ocean, which would entail an additional storage and redistribution of heat, are all neglected as well Attempts have been made to couple atmospheric models to ocean models ol intermediate complexity Thus, for example, Hansen et al (1988) have used a low resolution atmospheric model run with a mixed layer model coupled diffusively to a deep ocean to simulate the time dependent response to a gradual increase in trace gases

3.5.3	Ocean Models

To simulate the role of the ocean more adequately, a number of dynamical ocean models have been developed (Bryan, 1969, Semtner, 1974, Hasselmann, 1982, Cox, 1984, Oberhuber, 1989) The typical ocean model used for climate simulations lollows basically the same set of equations as the atmosphere if the equation defining the water vapour balance is replaced by one describing salinity As with atmosphenc GCMs, numerical solutions can be obtained by applying finite difference techniques and specifying appropriate surface boundary conditions (i e , fluxes of heat, momentum and fresh water) either from observations (uncoupled mode) or from an atmospheric GCM (coupled mode see Section 3 5 6) The vertical and horizontal exchange of temperature, momentum and salinity by diffusion or turbulent transfers is paiametnzed

The formation of sea-ice is generally treated as a purely thermodynamic piocess However, some models already include dynamical effects such as sea ice drift and deformation caused by winds and ocean currents (Oberhuber et al 1989)

One of the pioblems of simulating the ocean is the wide range of time and length scales involved The models for climate sensitivity studies resolve only the largest time and length scales (horizontal resolution 200 to 1000 km, time scale hours to 10 000 years, vertical resolution 2 to 20 levels) High lesolulion models, which can resolve eddies, are now being tested (Semtnei and Chervin, 1988) but with the cuirently available computer power cannot be run sufficiently long enough to simulate climate changes

3.5.4	Carbon Cycle Models

The exchange ol carbon dioxide between the ocean and atmosphere can be simulated by adding equations to the ocean component lor the air-sea gas flux, the physics of gas solubility the chemistry of caibon dioxide buffering in sea watei and the biological pump (Maier Reimer and Hasselmann 1989) This extension of the coupled oceanatmosphere model will permit diagnosis ol the fractionation ol caibon dioxide between the atmosphere and ocean in the last hundied years and changes to that tiactionation in the futuie as the ocean begins to respond to

global warming, in particular through changes in the ocean mixed layer depth, which affects both the physical uptake ol carbon dioxide and the efficiency oi the biological pump The physical and chemical equations are well established, but more work is needed to establish equations for the biological pump The latter must parametrize the biological diversity, which varies regionally and seasonally and is likely to vary as the climate changes, ideally the equations themselves must cope with such changes without introducing too many variables Candidate sets of such robust biological equations have been tested in onedimensional models and are now being used in ocean circulation models with encouraging results It seems likely that they will have to be incorporated into eddy-resolving ocean circulation models in order to avoid biases due to the patchy growth of plankton They will also have to pay special attention to the seasonal boundary layer (the biologist s euphotic zone) and its interaction with the permanent thermocline in order to deal with nutrient and carbon dioxide recirculation Such models are computationally expensive and complete global models based on these equations will have to await the arrival ol more powerful supercomputers later in the 1990s Besides the biological organic carbon pump the biological calcium carbonate counter pump and interactions between the seawater and carbon sediment pools must be considered First results with models which include the organic carbon pump with a sediment leservoir indicate the importance of these processes (Heinze and Maier Reimer 1989)

3.5.5	Chemical Models

Due to the increasing awareness of the importance of trace gases othei than CO2 a numbei of research groups have now started to develop models considering the chemical interactions between a variety ol trace gases and the general circulation (Prather et al 1987) At the time of writing, these models have not yet been used in the models discussed so far to estimate the global climate change It will be mteiesting to see then impact on futuie climate change modelling

3 5.6 Coupled Models of the Atmosphere and the Ocean Due to the dominating influence of the ocean atmosphere link in the climate system, realistic climate change experiments require OGCM s and AGCM s to be coupled together by exchanging information about the sea surface temperatuic, the ice covei, the total (latent sensible and net longwave radiative) heat 1 lux, the solar radiation and the wind stress

One basic problem in the construction of coupled models arises fiom the wide range of time scales from about one day foi the atmosphere to 1000 years loi the deep ocean Synchronously coupled atmospheie ocean models aie extremely time consuming and limited computei iesouices

prohibit equilibrium being reached except with mixed-layer models Various asynchronous coupling techniques have been suggested to accelerate the convergence of a coupled model However, the problem is far lrom being solved and can only really be tackled by using faster computers

A second basic problem that arises through such coupling is model drift The coupled model normally drifts to a state that reflects the systematic errors of each respective model component because each sub model is no longer constrained by prescribed observed fluxes at the ocean-atmosphere interface Therefore flux correction terms are sometimes introduced to neutralize the climate drift and to obtain a realistic reference climate for climate change experiments (Sausen et al, 1988 Cubasch, 1989) (c f Section 4 9) However, these terms are additive and do not guarantee stability from further drift, They are also prescribed from present-day conditions and are not allowed to change with altered forcing from increased CO2

Carbon cycle models have already been coupled to ocean models, but coupling to an AGCM-OGCM has not yet been carried out

3.5.7	Use of Models

Despite their shortcomings, models provide a powerful facility for studies of climate and climate change A review of such studies is contained in Schlesinger (1983) They are normally used for investigations of the sensitivity of climate to internal and external factors and for prediction of climate change by firstly carrying out a control integration with parameters set for present day climate in order to establish a reference mean model climatology and the necessary statistics on modelled climatic variability These can both be verified against the observed climate and used for examination and assessment of the subsequently modelled climate change The climate change (peit urbation) iun is then carried out by repeating the model run with appropriately changed parameters (a doubling of CCh for example) and the diffeiences between this and the parallel control run examined The difference between the conliol and the peiturbed experiments is called the iesponse The significance of the response must be assessed against the model s natural variability (determined in the control run) using appropriate statistical tests These enable an assessment to be made (usually expressed in terms of probabilities) of the confidence that the changes obtained lepresent an implied climatic change, rather than simply a result ol the natural vai lability of the model

Typical integration times range from 5 to 100 yeais depending on the nature ol the investigation Until now most effoit to study the response to increased levels of greenhouse gas concentrations has gone into determining the equilibrium response of climate to a doubling of CO2 using atmospheric models coupled to slab ocean models A compaiatively small number of attempts have been made to

determine the transient (1 e time-dependent) climate response to anthropogenic forcing using coupled atmosphere and ocean circulation models

3 5 7 1 Equilibrium lesponse espeiiments

In an equilibrium response experiment both simulations, i e , the control experiment with the present amount of atmospheric CO2 and the perturbation experiment with doubled CO2, are run sufficiently long to achieve the respective equilibrium climates A review of such experiments is given in Schlesinger and Mitchell (1987) Fora mixed-layer ocean the response time to reach equilibrium amounts to several decades, which is feasible with present day computers For a fully coupled GCM the equilibrium response time would be several thousand years and cannot be achieved with present day computers A comprehensive list of equilibrium response experiments can be found in Table 3 2(a)

5 5 7 2 Time dependent response e\peiiments

Equilibrium response studies tor given CO2 increases are required as standard benchmark calculations for model intercomparison The results may be misleading, however, it applied to actual climate change caused by man s activities, because the atmospheric CO2 concentrations do not change abruptly but have been growing by about 0 4% per year Moreover, the timing of the atmospheric response depends crucially on the ocean heat uptake which might delay the CO2 induced warming by several decades Thus, foi realistic climate scenario computations, not only have the atmospheric processes to be simulated with some fidelity but also the oceanic heat transport which is largely governed by ocean dynamics First experiments with coupled dynamical atmosphere ocean models have been performed (Table 3 2(b)) and will be discussed later in Section 6

3.6	Illustrative Equilibrium Experiments

In this section climate sensitivity results, as produced by a large number of general circulation models, arc summarized for two quite different climate change simulations The fust refers to a simulation that was designed to suppress snow-ice albedo feedback so as to concentrate on the watei vapour and cloud feedbacks The second consists of a summary of global wanning due to a CO2 doubling

The lirst case, addressing only water vapour and cloud teedbacks consists of a perpetual July simulation in which the climate was changed by imposing a 4°C peituibation on the global sea surface tempeiatuie while holding sea ice fixed Since a perpetual July simulation with a geneial cnculation model results in vei> little snow covei in the Noithcrn Hemisphere this effective!) eliminates snow-ice albedo feedback The details of this simulation are given b_v

• Global

O Clear-sky

a>

0 E w ra CL

>,

>

<n c 0 CO









1 2

1 0

08

06

04

02

1 23456789 1011 1213 141516 17

T--1-

• •





O

8

0	a

• • n

• 8 O o °

o

o

o

o

o 0 O

o

o

&



Model number

Figure 3.6: Summary of the clear sky and global sensitivity parameters for 17 general circulation models

Cess et al (1989), the main point is that it was chosen so as to minimize computer time and thus allow a large number of modelling groups to participate in the intercomparison This procedure is in essence an inverse climate change simulation Rather than introducing a radiative forcing into the models and then letting the model climates respond to this forcing, the climate change was instead prescribed and the models in turn produced their respective radiative forcings

Cess et al (1989) have summarized climate sensitivity parameters as produced by 14 atmospheric general circulation models (most of them are referenced in Table 3 2(a) and 3 2(b) This number has since risen to 17 models and their sensitivity parameters (X as defined in Section 3 3 1) are summarized in Figure 3 6 The important point here is that cloud effects were isolated by separately averaging the models clear sky TOA fluxes, so that in addition to evaluating the climate sensitivity parameter for the globe as a whole (filled circles in Figure 3 6), it was also possible to evaluate the sensitivity parameter for an equivalent cleai-sky Earth (open circles)

Note that the models are in remarkable agreement with respect to the clear sky sensitivity parameter, and the model aveiagc X = 0 47 Km2W’l is consistent with the discussion of water vapour feedback (Section 3 3 2), for which it was suggested that X = 0 48 Km2w_l There is, howevei a nearly threefold variation in the global sensitivity paiametcr and since the clear sky sensitivity parameteis aie in good agreement, then this implies that most ol the disagieemcnts can be attributed to diffeiences in cloud lecdback A moic detailed demonstration of this is given by Cess et al (1989) The important conclusions

from this intercomparison are that the 17 models agree well with an observational determination of water vapour feedback, whereas improvements in the treatment of cloud feedback are needed if general circulation models are ultimately to be used as reliable climate predictions

The second type of simulation refers to a doubling of atmospheric CO2, so that in proceeding from one equilibrium climate to another, snow-ice albedo feedback is additionally activated in the general circulation models It must be cautioned however, that cloud feedback in this type of simulation should not be expected to be similar to that for the perpetual July simulation Furthermore, one should anticipate interactive effects between cloud feedback and snow-ice albedo feedback

Summarized in Table 3 2(a) are ATs results, as well as the related changes in global precipitation, for CO2 doubling simulations using a number of general circulation models All models show a significant increase in global-mean temperature which ranges from 1 9°C to 5 2°C As in the perpetual July simulations, cloud feedback probably introduces a large uncertainty, although here it is difficult to quantify this point

Most results lie between 3 5°C and 4 5°C, although this does not necessarily imply that the correct value lies in this range Nor does it mean that two models with comparable ATs values likewise produce comparable individual feedback mechanisms For example consider the Wetherald and Manabe (1988) and Hansen et al (1984) simulations for which the respective ATs values are 4 0°C and 4 2°C Summarized in Table 3 3 are their diagnoses of individual feedback mechanisms These two models (labelled GFDL and GISS respectively) produce rather similar warmings in the absence of both cloud feedback and snow-ice albedo feedback The incorporation of cloud feedback, however, demonstrates that this is a stronger feedback in the GISS model, as is consistent with the perpetual July simulations But curiously the additional incorporation of snow-ice albedo feedback compensates for

Table 3.3: Compai ison of ATs (°C) foi the GFDL and GISS models with the piogiesstse addition of cloud and snow ice feedbacks

FEEDBACKS	GFDL	GISS
No cloud or snow-ice	1 7	20
Plus cloud	20	3 2
Plus snow ice	40	42

their differences in cloud feedback Thus, while the two models produce comparable global warming, they do so for quite different reasons

It should be emphasized that Table 3 3 should not be used to appraise the amplification factor due to cloud feedback since feedback mechanisms are interactive For example, from Table 3 3 the cloud feedback amplifications for the GFDL and GISS models might be inferred to be 1 2 and 1 6 respectively But, these are in the absence of snowice albedo feedback Conversely, if snow-ice albedo feedback is incorporated before cloud feedback, then the respective amplification factors are 1 3 and 1 8 These larger values are due to an amplification of cloud feedback by snow-ice albedo feedback

3.7	Summary

Many aspects of the global climate system can now be simulated by numerical models The feedback processes associated with these aspects are usually well represented, but there appear to be considerable differences in the strength of the interaction of these processes in simulations using different models Section 4 examines results from various models in more detail

Unfortunately, even though this is crucial for climate change prediction, only a few models linking all the main components of the climate system in a comprehensive way have been developed This is mainly due to a lack of computer resources, since a coupled system has to take the different timescales of the sub-systems into account, but also the task requires interdisciplinary cooperation

An atmospheric general circulation model on its own can be integrated on currently available computers for several model decades to give estimates ol the variability about its equilibrium response, when coupled to a global ocean model (which needs millennia to reach an equilibrium) the demands on computer time are increased by several orders of magnitude The inclusion of additional sub-systems and a refinement of resolution needed to make regional predictions demands computer speeds several orders of magnitude faster than is available on current machines

We can only expect current simulations of climate change to be broadly accurate and the results obtained by existing models may become obsolete as more complete models of the climate system are used Results from fully coupled atmosphere ocean models are now beginning to emerge, these are given in Section 6

The palaeo-analogue method, although of limited use for detailed climate prediction (see Section 5), nevertheless gives valuable information about the spectrum of past and future climate changes and provides data for the calibration of circulation models in climate regimes differing from the present Results from these calibrations are shown in Section 4

References

Boer G et al , 1989 Equilibrium response studies with the CCC climate model Pers Com

Bryan, K 1969 A numerical method for the study of the circulation of the world ocean J Comp Phss , 4, 347-376

Budyko, Ml, 1982 The Earths climate ,past and future (English translation) Academic Press

Budyko, M I , A B Ronov and A L Yanshin, 1987 History of the Earth's atmosphere (English translation) Springer-Verlag

Budyko, M 1 and Y Izrael, 1987 Anthropogenic climate change , Gidrometeori/dat, 406pp

Cess, R D and G L Potter, 1988 A methodology lor undetstanding and intercompaiing atmospheric climate feedback processes in general circulation models 1 Gcophss Rc s , 93, 8305 8314

Cess RD.GL Potter, J P Blanchet GJ Boet.SJ Ghan, J T Kiehl, If LeTreut 7X Li, X Z I king JFB Mitchell, J J Moicielte, DA Randall, MR Riches, E Roeckner, U Schlese A Slingo, K E Taylor, W M Washington R T Wetherald and 1 Yagai, 1989 Inletpietation of cloud climate feedback as pioduced by 14 atmospheric geneial cnculation models S< tern. e, 245, 513 516

('ess, R D , 1989 Gauging water vapoui feedback Natme 342 736 737

Cox, M D 1984 A primitive equation, three dimensional model ol the ocean GFDL ocean group, lei Im Rip No 1 250pp

Charlson, R J , J E Lovelock, M O Andrae and S G Watren, 1987 Oceanic plankton, atmosphenc sulphui, cloud albedo and climate Natme, 326, 655-661

Cubasch U , 1989 Coupling a global atmospheie model with a global ocean model using the flux coircction method, In

Aspects of iouplini> atmospheic and ocean models Rep No 6 .Met Inst Univ llambuig, FRG

Cubasch U , E Maiei Reimer, B Santei, U Mikolajewicz, E Roecknet and M Bocttinger, 1990 The response ol a global coupled O-AGCM to CO2 doubling MPI report, MPI fuer Meteoiologic Hamburg, FRG

Emiliani C 1966 Isotopic palaeotempeiatuies. S'< teiti e 154, 851-857

Gates I 1975 The physical basis ol climate and climate modelling GARP Publication Series No 16 WMO, Geneva

Gordon and Hunt, 1989 Australian equilibnum lesponse expeiiments Peis Com

Hansen J D Johnston, A Lacis, S Lebedeil. P Lee D Rind and G Russel. 1981 Climate impact ol incieasing atmosphenc cat bon dioxide S< lent e, 213. 957 966

Hansen J . A Lacis, D Rind. L Russel P Stone I Fung, R Rued) J Lerner, 1984 Climate sensitivity analysis of leedback mechanisms In Climate piocesses and climate si nsitis its, (ed J Hansen and T Takahashi). Geophys Monogt Ser 29, 130-163 AGU, Washington

Hansen J 1 Fung, A Lacis, D Rind S Lebedeff, R Ruedy and G Russel, 1988 Global climate changes as forecast by GISS s tluee dimensional model / Gcophss Res 93.9341 9364

Hasselmann. K 1976 Stochastic climate models Part 1 Iheoix /<//ns. 28, 6 473 485

Hasselmann, K 1982 An ocean model tor climate variability studies Pioif Onamnp 11 69-92

Hasselmann, K , 1988 PIPs and POPs - A general formalism for the reduction of dynamical systems in terms of Principal Interaction and Patterns and Principal Oscillation Patterns J Geopliss Res, 93, 11,015 - 11,022

Hein/e. C and E Maier Reimer, 1989 Glacial pCO2 reduction by the world ocean Experiments with the Hamburg Carbon Cycle model, In J Woild lonjeience on Anais sis and Evaluation of atmosphenc CChdata pi esent and past WMO, Environmental Pollution Monitoring and Research Program, Rep No 59, 9 14

Houghton, J (ed), 1984 The Global Climate Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK 233pp

Manabe, S and RJ Stouffer, 1980 Sensitivity of a global climate model to an increase in the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere / Geopliss Res 85, 5529-5554

Manabe, S , K Bryan and M Spelman, 1989 Transient response of a global ocean atmosphere model to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide submitted to J Geophys Res

Maier Reimer, E and K Hasselmann, 1987 Transport and stoiage of CO2 in the ocean - an inorganic ocean circulation carbon cycle model, Climate Dynamics, 2, 63-90

Maier Reimer E and U Mikolajewicz, 1989 Experiments with an OGCM on the cause of the Younger Dryas", MPI Report No 39 MPI fur Meteorologic Hamburg

Meehl, G A and W M Washington, 1988 A comparison of soil moisture sensitivity in two global climate models JAS, 45, 1476 1492

Meleshko, 1990 CO2 equilibrium response studies with the CCCP climate model Pers Com

Mikolajewicz, U and E Maier Reimer, 1990 Internal secular variability in an ocean general circulation model, MPI Report No 50, MPI fui Meteoiologie, Hamburg

Mitchell, JFB and D A Warrilow, 1987 Summer dryness in northern mid latitude due to increased CO2 Natme, 330, 238240

Mitchell, J F B , C A Senior and W J Ingram, 1989 CO2 and climate A missing feedback9 Naiuie, 341, 132-134

Noda, A and T Tokioka, 1989 The effect of doubling CO2 concentration on convective and non-convective precipitation in a general circulation model coupled with a simple mixed layer ocean I Met Soi Japan, 61, 95 110

Noilham, J and S Planton 1989 A simple parametrization of land suilace processes for meteorological models MWR, 117, 536 549

Oberhuber, J , 1989 An isopycnic global ocean model MPI ieport, MPI fuer Meteorologie, Hamburg

Oberhuber, J , F Lunkeit and R Sausen, 1990 CO2 doubling experiments with a coupled global isopycnic ocean-atmosphere circulation model Rep d Met Inst Univ Hamburg, Hamburg, FRG

Prather, M , M McElroy, S Wolfsy, G Russel and D Rind, 1987 Chemistry of the global troposphere Fluorocarbons as tracers ol air motion JGR, 92, 6579 6611

Ramanathan V L Callis, R Cess J Hansen, F Isaksen, W Kuhn, A Laos, F Luther J Mahlman, R Reck and M Schlesinger 1987 Climate-chemical Interactions and eflects ol changing atmosphenc trace gases Res of Geoplissn s, 25, 1441 1482

Raval, A and V Ramanathan, 1989 Observational determination of the greenhouse effect Native, 342, 758 761

Roeckner E, U Schlese, J Biercamp and P Loewe, 1987 Cloud optical depth feedbacks and climate modelling Natuie, 329, 138-140

Santer, B and T M L Wigley, 1990 Regional validation of means, variances and spatial patterns in general circulation model control runs JGR, 95, 829 850

Sausen, R , K Barthel and K Hasselmann, 1988 Coupled oceanatmosphere models with flux corrections Climate Dynamic s, 2, 154-163

Schlesinger, M E , 1983 A review of climate model simulations of CC>2 induced climatic change OSU Report 41, Climatic Research Institute and Department of Atmospheric Sciences

Schlesinger, M E and J F B Mitchell, 1987 Climate Model Simulations of the Equilibrium Climatic Response to Increased Carbon Dioxide Res ieyy s of Geophy sic s, 25, 760-798

Schlesinger, M E and E Roeckner 1988 Negative or positive cloud optical depth feedback Naim e, 335 303-304

Schlesinger, ME and ZC Zhao, 1989 Seasonal climatic change introduced by doubled CO2 as simulated by the OSU atmospheric GCM/mixed-layer ocean model J Climate, 2, 429-495

Semtner A J , Jr , 1974 An oceanic general circulation model with bottom topography Numerical Simulation of Weather and Climate, Technical Report No 9, Department of Meteorology, University of California, Los Angeles

Semtner A J , Jr , 1976 A model for the thermodynamic growth of sea ice in numerical investigations of climate J Phys Oceanot>i , 6, 379 389

Semtner A J , Jr and R M Chervm, 1988 A simulation of the global ocean circulation with resolved eddies J Geophys Res, 93, 15,502 15,522

Shackleton, N J , 1985 Oceanic carbon isotope constraints on oxygen and carbon dioxide in the Cenozoic atmosphere "The carbon cycle and atmospheric CO2, natural variations Archean to present Geophysical monos’! aph, 32, 412 417

Simmons A J and L Bengtsson 1984 Atmospheric general circulation models, then design and use lor climate studies In The Global Climate (ed J Houghton) Cambridge University Press 233 pp

Sinitsyn V M , 1965 Ancient climates in Eurasia, Part

1 Palaeogene and Neogene Izd LGU, Lemngrad(R)

Sinitsyn, VM 1967 Introduction to Palaeo-chmatology Nedra,Leningrad (R)

Stouffer RJ,S Manabe and K Bryan 1989 On the climate change induced by a gradual increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide Natm e, 342, 660-662

Untersteiner, N , 1984 The Cryosphere In The Global Climate (ed J Houghton), Cambridge University Piess, 233 pp

v. Storch H and F Zwiers, 1988 Recuirence analysis of climate sensitivity experiments Journal of Climate, 1, 157-171 Washington , WM and GA Meehl, 1984 Seasonal Cycle expeiiments on the climate sensitivity due to a doubling of CO2 with an atmospheric GCM coupled to a simple mixed layer ocean model / Geophys Res 89 9475 9503

Washington WM and G A Meehl, 1989 Climate sensitivity due to incieased CO2 experiments with a coupled atmosphere

and ocean general circulation model Climate Dynamic s, 4, 1 38

Washington, W M and C L Parkinson, 1986 An introduction to three dimensional climate modeling University Science Books, 20 Edgehill Road, Mill Valley, CA 94941 , 422pp

Wetherald , RT and S Manabe, 1986 An investigation of cloud cover change in response to thermal forcing Climatic Change, 10, 11 42

Wetherald, RT and S Manabe, 1988 Cloud feedback processes in a general circulation model J Atmos Set , 45, 1397-1415

Wigley, T M L , 1989 Possible climatic change due to SO2-denved cloud condensation nuclei Natuie, 339, 365 367

Wilson, C A and J F B Mitchell, 1987 Simulated climate and CO2 induced climate change over western Europe Climatic Change, 10, 11 42

Zwiers, F W , 1988 Aspects of the statistical analysis of climate experiments with multiple integrations MPI Report No 18, MPI fur Meteorologie, Hamburg,

4

Validation of Climate Models

W.L. GATES, P.R. ROWNTREE, Q.-C. ZENG

Contributors:

P. Arkin; A. Baede; L. Bengtsson; A. Berger; C. Blondin; G. Boer; K. Bryan;

R.	Dickinson; S. Grotch; D, Harvey; E. Holopainen; R. Jenne; J. Kutzbach;

H.	Le Trent; P. Lemke; B. McAvaney; G. Meehl; P Morel; T. Palmer; L. Prahm;

S.	Schneider; K. Shine; I. Simmonds; J. Walsh; R. Wetherald, J. Willebrand.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary	97

4.1	Introduction	99

4 1 1 Model Overview	99

4 1 2 Methods and Problems of Model Validation	100

4.2	Simulation of the Atmospheric Circulation	102

42	1 Sea-Level Pressure	102

422	Temperature	102

423	Zonal Wind	104

4 2 4 Eddy Kinetic Energy	105

4.3	Simulation of Other Key Climate Variables	107

43	1 Surface Air Temperature	107

43 2 Precipitation	108

4 3 3 Soil Moisture	108

4 3 4 Snow Cover	112

4 3 5 Sea-Ice	113

4 3 6 Clouds and Radiation	113

4.4	Simulation of Regional Seasonal Cycle

4 4 1 Surface Air Temperature

4 4 2 Precipitation

115

115

115

4.5	Simulation of Regional Climate Anomalies	116

4 5 1 Response to El Nino SST Anomalies	116

4 5 2 Sahelian Drought	118

4 5 3 Summer Monsoon	119

4.6	Simulation of Extreme Events	119

4.7	Validation from Operational Weather Forecasting 120

4.8	Simulation of Ocean Climate	120

48 1 Status of Ocean Modelling	121

48 2 Validation of Ocean Models	121

4.9	Validation of Coupled Models	122

4.10	Validation from Palaeo-Climate	124

4 10 1 Observational Studies of the Holocene	124

4 10 2 Model Studies of Holocene Climate	124

4 10 3 Other Validation Opportunities	125

4.11	Conclusions and Recommendations	126

References

127

Executive Summary

1	The validation of the present day climate simulated by atmospheric general circulation models shows that there is considerable skill in the portrayal of the large-scale distribution of the pressure, temperature, wind and precipitation in both summer and winter, although this success is in part due to the constraints placed on the sea surface temperature and sea-ice

2	On regional scales there are significant errors in these variables in all models Validation for five selected regions shows mean surface air temperature errors of 2 to 3°C, compared with an average seasonal variation of 15°C Similarly, the simulation of precipitation exhibits errors on sub continental scales (1000-2000 km) which differ in location between models Validation on these scales for the five selected regions shows mean errors of from 20% to 50% of the average rainfall depending on the model

3	The limited soil moisture data available show that the simulated middle latitude summer and winter distributions qualitatively reflect most of the observed large-scale characteristics

4	Snow cover can be well simulated m winter apart from errors in regions where the temperature is poorly simulated. Though comparison is difficult in other seasons because of the different forms of model and observed data, it is evident that the broad seasonal variation can be simulated, although there are significant errors on regional scales

5	The radiative fluxes at the top of the atmosphere, important for the response of climate to radiative perturbations, are simulated well in some models, indicating some skill in cloud parameterization Errors averaged around latitude circles are mostly less than 20 Wm‘2 with average error magnitudes as low as 5 Wm_2 or about 2% of the unperturbed values, however, there are substantial discrepancies in albedo, particularly in middle and high latitudes due to the sensitivity of the parameterization schemes

6. There has been a general reduction in the errors in more recent models as a result of increased resolution, changes in the parameterization of convection, cloudiness and surface processes and the introduction of parameterizations of gravity wave diag

7	Although the daily and mterannual variability of temperature and precipitation have been examined only to a limited extent, there is evidence that they are overestimated in some models, especially during summer The daily variability of sea-level pressure can be well simulated, but the eddy kinetic energy in the upper troposphere tends to be underestimated

8	Our confidence that changes simulated by the latest atmospheric models used in climate change studies can be given credence is increased by their generally satisfactory portrayal of aspects of low-frequency variability, such as the atmospheric response to sea surface temperature anomalies associated with the El Nino and with wet and dry periods in the Sahel, and by their ability to simulate aspects of the climate at selected times during the last 18,000 years

9	Models of the oceanic general circulation simulate many of the observed large scale features of ocean climate, especially m lower latitudes, although their solutions are sensitive to resolution and to the parameterization of sub-gridscale processes such as mixing and convective overturning

10	Atmospheric models have been coupled with simple mixed layer ocean models in which a flux adjustment is often made to compensate for the omission of heat advection by ocean currents and for other deficiencies Confidence in these models is enhanced by their ability to simulate aspects of the climate of the last ice age

11	Atmospheric models have been coupled with multi-layer oceanic general circulation models, in which an adjustment is sometimes made to the surface heat and salinity fluxes Although so far such models are of relatively coarse resolution, the large scale structure of the ocean and atmosphere can be simulated with some skill

12	There is an urgent need to acquire further data for climate model validation on both global and regional scales, and to perform validation against data sets produced in the course of operational weather forecasting

4.1	INTRODUCTION

Climate models, and those based on general circulation models (GCMs) in particular, are mathematical formulations of atmosphere, ocean and land surface processes that are based on classical physical principles They represent a unique and potentially powerful tool for the study of the climatic changes that may result from increased concentrations of CO2 and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere Such models are the only available means to consider simultaneously the wide range of interacting physical processes that characterize the climate system, and their objective numerical solution provides an opportunity to examine the nature of both past and possible future climates under a variety of conditions In order to evaluate such model estimates properly however, it is necessary to validate the simulations against the observed climate, and thereby to identify their systematic errors, particularly errors common to several models These errors or model biases must be taken into account in evaluating the estimates of future climate changes Additional caution arises from the GCMs’ relatively crude treatment of the ocean and their neglect of other potentially-important elements of the climate system such as the upper atmosphere and atmospheric chemical and surface biological processes While it is to be expected that GCMs will gradually improve there will always be a range of uncertainty associated with their results, the scientific challenge to climate modelling is to make these uncertainties as small as possible

The purpose of this section is to present an authoritative overview of the accuracy ol current GCM based climate models, although space limitations have not allowed consideration of all climate variables We have also not considered the simpler climate models since they do not allow assessment of regional climate changes and have to be calibrated using the more complex models We begin this task by evaluating the models’ ability to reproduce selected features of the observed mean climate and the average seasonal climate variations, after which we consider their ability to simulate climate anomalies and extreme events We also consider other aspects which increase our overall confidence in models such as the performance of atmospheric models in operational weather prediction and of atmospheric and coupled atmosphereocean models in the simulation of low-frequency variability and palaeo-chmates

4.1.1	Model Overview

The models that have been used for climate change experiments have been described in Section 3 5 and aie discussed further below Because of limitations in computing power, the higher resolution atmospheric models have so far been used only in conjunction with the

simple mixed-layer ocean models, as in the equilibrium experiments in Section 5 Many of these models give results similar to those from experiments with prescribed sea surface temperature (SST) and sea-ice, because these variables are constrained to be near the observed values by use of prescribed advective heat fluxes This assessment places an upper bound on the expected performance of models with more complete representations of the ocean, whose results are discussed in Section 6

Although the atmospheric models that have been developed over the past several decades have many differences in their formulations and especially in their physical parameterizations, they necessarily have a strong family resemblance It can therefore be understood that though they all generate simulations which are to a substantial degree realistic, at the same time they display a number of systematic errors in common, such as excessively low temperatures in the polar lower stratosphere and excessively low levels of eddy kinetic energy in the upper troposphere On a regional basis atmospheric GCMs display a wide variety of errors, some of which are related to the parameterizations of sub-gridscale processes and some to the models’ limited resolution Recent numerical experimentation with several models has revealed a marked sensitivity of simulated climate (and climate change) to the treatment of clouds while significant sensitivity to the parameterization of convection, soil moisture and frictional dissipation has also been demonstrated These model errors and sensitivities and our cuirent uncertainty over how best to represent the processes involved require a serious consideration of the extent to which we can have confidence in the performance of models on different scales

As anticipated above, the first part of this validation of climate models focuses on those models that have been used for equilibrium experiments with mcicascd CO2 as discussed in Section 5 Many of the models considered (Table 3 2(a) - see caption to Figure 4 1(a) foi models leference numbers) are of relatively low resolution since until recently it is only such models that could be integrated for the long periods lequircd to obtain a clear signal To represent the seasonal cycle realistically and to estimate equilibrium climate change the ocean must be represented in such a way that it can respond to seasonal forcing with an appropriate amplitude All the models in Table 3 2(a) have been run with a coupled mixed-layer or slab ocean The period used for validation of these models is typically about ten years this is believed to be sufficient to del me the mean and standard deviation of atmospheric variables foi validation purposes Additionally some of these models (versions listed in Table 3 2(b)) have been coupled to a dynamic model of the deeper ocean (see Section 6)

4	1.2 Methods and Problems of Model Validation

The questions we need to answei in this assessment concern the suitability of individual models foi estimating climate change The response ol modelled climate to a perturbation ol the radiative or other forcing has been shown to depend on the control climate How serious can a model's errors be lor its response to a perturbation still to becrediblc? Mitchell et al (1987) pointed out that it may be possible to allow for some discrepancies between simulated and observed climates, provided the patterns are sufficiently alike that relevant physical mechanisms can be identified Foi example, they found that with increased CO2 and mcicased suiface tempeiaturcs, piecipitation tended to increase where it was already heavy, so that >f a rainbelt was dif ferently located in two models, the response patterns could differ but still have the same implications for the teal climate change However, although a perfect simulation may not be required, it is clear that the better the simulation the more reliable the conclusions concerning climate change that may be made Also, since, as discussed in Section 3, the magnitude ol the response depends on the feedbacks, these feedbacks should be realistically represented in the models Thus, in selecting model variables with which to validate atmospheric components of the climate models, we considered the following

a)	Variables that are impoitant loi the description of the atmospheric circulation and which therefore ought to be realistically portrayed in the control simulations if the modelled changes are to be given credence Examples include sea-level pressure and atmospheric wind and temperature, and their variability as portrayed by the kinetic energy of eddies

b)	Variables that are critical in defining climate changes generated by greenhouse gases These data also need to be realistic in control simulations for the present climate d the model predictions are to be credible Examples include suriace air temperature, precipitation, and soil moisture, along with their day-to-day and year-to-year variability

c)	Variables that are important for climate feedbacks If they are poorly simulated, we cannot expect changes in global and regional climate to be accurately estimated Examples arc snow cover sea-ice, and clouds and their radiative effects

In general, the assessments made can only be relative in character It is not usually possible to specify a critical value that crrois must not exceed Thus temperatuie changes may be realistically simulated ccen when the modelled tempeiatures are in error by scvcial degrees, for example, the error may be due to excessive night time cooling of air near the surface which may have little cl tect on other aspects of the simulation On the other hand it may be obvious that an erroi is too serious lor much

cicdence to be given to changes in a particular region for example, a piediction of changes in temperature in a coastal region with observed winds off the ocean, if the simulated winds blow off the land To allow the reader to make such assessments, maps are shown for a number of key variables and models for which detailed changes are depicted in Section 5

The validation of climate models requires, of couise, the availability of appropriate observed data For some variables of interest, observed data are unavailable, or are available for only certain regions of the world In addition to traditional climatological data, useful compilations of a number of variables simulated by climate models have been piovided by Schutz and Gates (1971, 1972), Oort (1983) and Levitus (1982), and more recent compilations of atmospheric statistics have been made using analyses from operational weather prediction (see, for example, Trenberth and Olson, 1988) Rather than attempting to provide a comprehensive summary of observed climatic data, we have used what appear to be the best available data in each case, even though the length and quality of the data are uneven Satellite observing systems also provide important data sets with which to validate some aspects of climate models, and when fully incorporated in the data assimilation routines of operational models such data are expected to become an important new source of global data for model validation

A wide range of statistical methods has been used to compare model simulations with observations (Livezey, 1985, Katz, 1988, Wigley and Santer, 1990, Santer and Wigley, 1990) No one method, however, is "ideal" in view of the generally small samples and high noise levels involved and the specific purposes of each validation Other factors that can complicate the validation process include variations in the form in which variables are represented in different models, for example, soil moisture may be expressed as a fraction of soil capacity or as a depth, and snowcover may be portrayed by the fractional cover or by the equivalent mass of liquid water Another problem is the inadequate representation of the distribution of some climatic variables obtainable with available obsei vations, such as precipitation over the oceans and soil moisture

Another method of validation which should be considered is internal validation where the accuracy of a particular model process or parameterization is tested by comparison with observations or with results of more detailed models of the process This approach has only been applied to a very limited extent The best example is the validation of radiative tiansfer calculations conducted under the auspices of the WCRP programme for Intercomparison of Radiation Codes in Climate Models (ICRCCM) This intercomparison established the relative accuiacy of radiation codes lor clear sky conditions against

line-by-line calculations, and has led to improvements in several climate models Similarly, the mtcrcomparison of simulated cloud-radiative forcing with satellite observations from the Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE) should result in improvements in the representation of clouds in climate models

In addition to validation of the present climate, it is instructive to consider the evidence that climate models are capable of simulating climate changes Important evidence comes from atmospheric models when used m other than

climate simulations, since the ocean surface tcmperatuie is often constrained in similar ways Relevant experiments in this regard for atmospheric models are those with variations of tropical sea-surface temperature (SST) in the El Nino context Numerical weather prediction, which uses atmospheric models that are similar in many respects to those used in climate simulation, provides an additional source of validation The simulation of climate since the last glacial maximum, for which we have some knowledge of the land ice, trace gas concentrations and ocean surface

OBSERVED	—	—	GISS
NCAR		-F	GFLO
GFHI	X	X	UKLO
UKHI	- -	-	CCC

970

/

T

1

90	75	60	45	30	15

0	-15	-30	-45	-60	-75	-90

LATITUDE

Figure 4.1: Zonally averaged sea-level pressure (hPa) for observed (Schutz and Gates, 1971, 1972) and models (a) December-January-February, (b) June-July-August Model reference numbers (Table 3 2 (a)) are CCC (20), GFHI (21), GFLO (13), GISS (11), NCAR(7) UKHI(22), UKLO(15)

temperatures, also provides a useful test of climate models Finally for validation of the experiments on transient climate change discussed in Section 6, it is important to consider the validation of ocean and coupled oceanatmosphere models

4.2	Simulation of the Atmospheric Circulation

In this section we consider a number of basic atmospheric variables for which validation data are readily available and whose satisfactory simulation is a prerequisite for confidence in the models ability to portray climate change

4.2.1	Sea-Level Pressure

The sea-level pressure pattern provides a uselul char actcn/ation of the atmospheric circulation near the surface and is closely related to many aspects of climate A simple but revealing measure of the pressuie pattern is the northsouth profile of the zonal average (average around a latitude circle) (Figure 4 1) In both solstitial seasons the structure is rather similar, with a deep Antarctic trough subtropical ridges with a near-equatorial trough between and a rather weak and asymmetric pattern in northern middle and high latitudes The models approximate the observed pattern with varying degrees ol success all simulate to some extent the subtropical ridges and Antarctic tiough The ridges are in some cases displaced polewaid and theie is a consideiable range in then strength particulaily in the NH (Northern Hemisphere) In the lower lesolution models the Antarctic tiough is generally too weak and sometimes poorly located

The dependence of the simulation of the Antarctic trough on resolution evident here for the GFDL and UKMO models has been found in several pievious studies (Manabc et al 1978 Hansen et al 1983 Dyson 1985) While Manabc et al found it to be maiked in the GFDL spectial models only in July the similai GFDL model consideied heie shows it clearly in Januaiy also The earlier GFDL result is consistent with expei intents with the CCC model by Boei and Lazaie (1988) showing only a slight deepening ol an alieady deep Antarctic trough as resolution was incicascd The important lesult in the present context is that the ntoie realistic models used in CCD expeiintents ate those with higher resolution (CCC GFHI and UKHI)

The NH winter subtropical ridge is too strong in most models while the decrease in pressure fiont this ridge to the nud-latitude trough is generally excessive this is associated with excessively deep oceanic lows in some models and with spurious westerlies ovei the Rockies in otheis The westerlies in high icsolution models are ver} sensitive to the i epresentation of the diag associated with giaxitv waves induced by mountains without it a ring of strong westerlies extends around middle latitudes dining northern winter (Shngo and Pearson 1987)

The models simulate the seasonal reversal from northern summer to winter (for example Figure 4 2) To some degree this reflects the dominance of thermal forcing of the pressure pattern and the fact that most of the models have ocean temperatures which are kept close to climatology Summer temperatures over land are strongly affected by the availability of soil moisture (see Section 4 3 3), the absence of evaporative cooling generates higher surface temperatuie and lower pressure as in the “dry land” experiment ol Shukla and Mintz (1982) This effect is evident in some ol the models simulations of pressure over land in the summer A serious shortcoming of the lower resolution models in the northern summer is the tendency to develop too strong a ridge between the Azores high and the Arctic, this error shows up as the absence of a trough near 60°N in Figuie 4 1(b) and was also found in previous assessments (e g , Manabe et al 1978, Dyson, 1985)

The variability of the pressure pattern can usefully be separated into the daily variance within a month and the mterannual variability of monthly means Both are simulated with some skill by models, especially the daily variance (e g Figure 4 3) in particular, the variability maxima over the eastern Atlantic and northeast Pacific are well simulated and in the Southern Hemisphere high values arc simulated near 60°S as observed These results indicate that the models can successfully simulate the major storm tracks in middle latitudes On smaller scales, however there are regionally important errors, associated for example with the displacements of the variability maxima in the Northern Hemisphere

In summary the recent higher resolution models are capable of generally realistic simulations of the time averaged sea level pressure and of the temporal pressure variability

4.2	2 Temperature

While models successfully simulate the major features of the observed tcmpciature structure of the atmosphere, all models contain systematic errors such as those shown in the simulated zonally averaged temperatures in Figure 4 4 Of eirors common to many models, the most notable is the general coldness of the simulated atmosphere, simulated tempeiatures in the polar upper troposphere and lower stratosphere are too low in summer by more than 10°C while the lower troposphere in tropical and middle latitudes is too cold in both summer and winter The latter error may in some cases be alleviated by increasing the honzontal resolution (Boer and Lazare 1988, Ingram, personal communication) The existence of such common deficiencies despite the considerable differences in the models resolution numerical treatments and physical parametei 1/ations implies that all models may be misrepiesenting (oi indeed omitting) some physical mechanisms In contrast in some regions of the

(d) JJA MEAN SEA LEVEL PRESSURE: UKHI

Figure 4.2: Sea-level pressure (hPa) for December-January-February (a.b) and June-July-August (c,d) for: (a,c) Observed (Schutz and Gates 1971, 1972) and (b,d) the UKHI model (No. 22, Table 3.2(a))

(c) JJA MEAN SEA LEVEL PRESSURE: OBSERVED

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.3: Daily standard deviation of 1000 hPa height (hm) for December-January-February for: (a) Observed (Trenberth and Olson, 1988), (b) For CCC model (No. 20 Table 3.2(a)).

Figure 4.4: Zonally averaged temperature errors (°C) for an early version of the CCC model (not shown in Table 3.2(a)) for December-January-February. Contours every 2°C with negative errors dashed.

atmosphere, the simulated temperatures do not have a consistent bias and are warmer than observed in some models and cooler than observed in others.

In summary, the major features of the observed zonally averaged temperature structure are successfully simulated by modern general circulation models. There are, however, characteristic errors in specific regions, notably the polar upper troposphere and lower stratosphere in summer and much of the lower troposphere where temperatures are colder than observed in all models.

4.2.3 Zonal Wind

The winds are closely linked to the pressure and temperature distributions. The general poleward decrease of temperature in most of the troposphere leads to westerly flow, at least in the zonal mean (Figure 4.5). The major features in both solstitial seasons are the closed-off jets in each hemisphere and the easterlies in the tropics, especially near the surface and in the lower stratosphere. While most of the models represent these features to some extent, there

Latitude

Figure 4.5: Zonally averaged zonal wind (ms'1) for December-January-February for: (a) Observed (Arpe, personal communication), based on ECMWF analyses; (b) GFHI model (No. 21 Table 3.2(a)).

Figure 4.6: Zonally averaged 200 hPa zonal wind (ms1) for various models and as observed (Trenberth, personal communication) for: (a) June-July-August, (b) December-January-February.

are a number of errors in common, The most prominent of these are excessive westerlies above the summer jet, especially in the SH, and above and poleward of the winter jet. In consequence, some models fail to close the winter subtropical jet (i.e., separate it from the stratospheric polar night jet). This problem can also be alleviated by improving the vertical resolution (Cariolle et al., (1990)). In the NH the closure error is smallest in the more recent simulations using higher resolution models (e.g., Figure 4.5(b)), although this improvement may owe more to the inclusion of gravity wave drag than to the improvement in resolution. Dyson (1985) found that improved resolution helped to intensify the NH summer jet; this result is also evident here, as shown by Figure 4.6, which allows comparison of the observed and modelled meridional profiles of wind at 200 hPa. At this level the June-July-August jet in the SH is realistically simulated in most models, but again most fail to close it.

In summary, although most models represent the broad features of the observed zonal wind structure, only the more recent models with the more realistic simulations of sea-level pressure succeed in closing the winter jets and in providing a sufficiently strong NH summer jet.

Latitude

Figure 4.7: Zonally averaged transient eddy kinetic energy (m2s"2) for December-January-February for (a) Observed (Trenberth and Olson, 1988) based on ECMWF analyses; (b) T30 version of the CCC model (not listed in Table 3.2(a)) (from Boer andLazare, 1988).

4.2.4	Eddy Kinetic Energy

A realistic climate model should simulate correctly not only the zonally-averaged atmospheric variables but also their space-time variability. Nearly half the atmospheric kinetic energy resides in “eddies”, by which meteorologists understand deviations of the flow from zonally-averaged

SURFACE AIR TEMPERATURE <K>	SURFACE AIR TEMPERATURE (K)

“i-----1----1----1-----1----1----1-----1

15	0	-15	-30	-45	-60	-75	-90

LATITUDE

210 -I-----1----1----1-----r-

90	75	60	45	30

90	75	60	45	30	15	0	-15	-30	-45	-60	-75	-90

LATITUDE

Figure 4.8: Zonally averaged surface air temperatures (K) for various models and as observed (Schutz and Gates, 1971, 1972) for (a) December-January-February, (b) June-July-August

conditions, as caused, for example, by cyclones and meanders of the jet stream A measure of the intensity of the eddies is the “eddy kinetic energy" (EKE), which is observed to be largest in the extratropical latitudes in the upper troposphere

A persistent error of atmospheric general circulation models is their tendency to undeiestimatc the EKE paiticularly the transient pait representing vanations about the time-aveiaged How When intcgiated from ical initial conditions the models tend to lose EKE in the couise ol the integiation until the) reach their own

characteristic climate For example, Figure 4 7 compares the transient EKE for December-January-February in a version of the CCC model (Boer and Lazare, 1988) with the corresponding observed EKE (Trenberth, personal communication), and shows a significant underestimate of the EKE maxima in middle latitudes There is a suggestion ot overestimation in the tropics Similar results have been obtained toi ioiecast models (WGNE 1988 see also Section 4 7) Since iecent expci iments have indicated that resolution is not the basic reason for this systematic EKE erroi (Boei and La/arc 1988 Tibaldi et al , 1989), it is

(a) DJF GISS - OBSERVED SURFACE AIR TEMPERATURE

(b) JJA GISS - OBSERVED SURFACE AIR TEMPERATURE

Figure 4.9: Surface air temperature errors for December-January-February (a) and June-July-August (b) for GISS model (No. 11, Table 3.2(a)). Errors calculated relative to Schutz and Gates (1971, 1972). Areas less than -3°C shaded.

probably caused by the models’ treatment of physical processes.

In summary, models suffer from a deficiency of transient eddy kinetic energy, an error which appears most marked in the upper extratropical troposphere and which may be reversed in the tropics.

4.3	Simulation of Other Key Climate Variables

In this section we assess the global distribution of variables involved in the energy and hydrological balances whose satisfactory simulation is important for determining the climate's response to increased greenhouse gases.

4.3.1	Surface Air Temperature

The temperature of the air near the surface is an important climatic parameter. The global pattern is dominated by large pole to equator gradients which models simulate well (Figure 4.8) though it should be recalled that in most of the models shown, the ocean surface temperatures are maintained near the correct level by 'flux adjustment' techniques. Because of the dominance of the pole-to-equator gradient, the maps shown (Figure 4.9) are of departures of temperature from the observed. Validation of this quantity from atmospheric GCMs is complicated by the models' low vertical resolution and by the relatively large diurnal variation of temperature near the surface.

A principal conclusion lrom the comparison of simulated with observed near-surlace air temperature is that while each model displays systematic errors, there are few errors common to all models One characteristic error is that temperatures over eastern Asia are too cold in winter (e g , Figure 4 9(a) over southeast Asia) Another, common to most models, is that temperatures are too high over the Antarctic ice sheet (Figure 4 8), in winter at least, this can be attributed to the models’ difficulty in resolving the shallow cold surface layer In summer, errors in the simulated ground wetness appear to be responsible for many of the temperature errors over the continents (compare Figures 4 8 and 4 12) this error being less marked in models with more complete representations of the land surface (e g , Figure 4 9) (See Section 4 4 for a detailed assessment for five selected areas)

The variability of surface an tempcratuie can, like sealevel pressure, be considered in terms ol the day-to-day vanations within a month or season, and the mterannual variations of monthly or seasonal means Detailed validations of these quantities for selected regions in North America in relatively low resolution models have been made by Rind et al (1989) and Mearns et al, (199) Both found variances to be too high on a daily time-scale, while for mterannual timescales, the results differed between the models An earlier study by Reed (1986) with a version of the UKMO model (not in Table 3 2(a)) also revealed too high variability on a daily time-scale in eastern England On the other hand, for the models reviewed in this assessment for which data were available, the daily vanance appeared to be capable ol realistic simulation though it tended to be deficient over northern middle latitudes, especially in summer

In summary, the patterns ol simulated surface air temperature are generally similar to the observed Errors common to most models include excessively cold air over eastern Asia in winter and too waim conditions over Antaictica Errors over the continents in summer are often associated with errors in ground wetness

4.3.2	Precipitation

A realistic simulation of precipitation is essential for many if not all studies of the impact ol climate change A number of estimates of the distributions of precipitation from obseivations are available, some of these are derived from station observations, which are generally considered adequate over land, one is derived from satellite measuiements of outgoing longwave radiation (Arkin and Meisnei, 1987, Arkin and Ardanuy 1989) while another is lrom ship observations of curient weathei coupled with estimated equivalent iainlall lates (e g Doiman and Bouike 1979) The differences among these analyses ate not insignificant but aie mostlx smaller than the difietences between the analyses and model simulations

While all models simulate the broad features of the observed precipitation pattern, with useful regional detail in some regions, (see, lor example the zonally averaged patterns in Figure 4 10 and the patterns for the higher resolution models in Figuie 4 11), significant errors are present, such as the generally inadequate simulation of the southeast Asia summei monsoon rainfall (see also Section 4 5 3), the zonal rainfall gradient across the tropical Pacific, and the southein summer rains in the Zaire basin These errors reduce the correlation between observed and modelled patterns over land to about 0 75 (model 22, Table 3 2(a)) A similar level of skill is evident in the assessment in Section 4 4 2 Some of the earlier models underestimate the dryness of the subtropics (Figure 4 10), while several models are much too wet in high latitudes in winter Models that do not use a flux correction to ensure an appioximately correct SST fail to simulate the eastern and central equatorial Pacific dry zone (not shown) There are also large differences between the recent model simulations of the intensity of the tropical oceanic rambelts though the (inevitable) uncertainties in the observed ocean precipitation can make it unclear which models are nearer reality

Rind et al (1989) and Mearns et al (1990) have found that over the USA mterannual variability of simulated precipitation in the GISS and NCAR models is generally excessive in both summer and winter, while daily variability is not seriously biased in either season, at least relative to the mean precipitation The NCAR study also revealed considerable sensitivity of the daily precipitation to the model formulation, particularly to aspects of the parameterization of evaporation over land Analyses of the UKMO model (Reed, 1986, Wilson and Mitchell, 1987) over western Europe showed that there were too many rain days, although occurrences of heavy rain were underpredicted

In summary, current atmospheric models are capable of realistic simulations of the broadscale precipitation pattern provided the ocean surface temperatures are accurately represented All the models assessed, however, have some important regional precipitation errors

4.3.3	Soil Moisture

Soil moisture is a climatic variable that has a significant impact on ecosystems and agriculture Some model experiments on the impact of increasing greenhouse gases on climate have shown large decreases in soil moisture over land in summer, this can provide a positive feedback with highei surface temperatures and decreased cloud cover Since there is no global coverage of obseivations of soil moistuic its validation is difficult Estimates of soil moisluie have been made by Mintz and Serafim (1989) from piecipitation data and estimates of evaporation but comparison with a recent analysis ol observations over the

LATITUDE

Figure 4.10: Zonally averaged precipitation (mm day *) for various models and as observed (Jaeger, 1976) for (a) December January February, (b) June-July-August

western USSR (Vinnikov and Yeserkepova, 1990) suggests the estimates are too low in high latitudes in summer (Table 4 11

Compared with the Mintz-Serafim observational estimates, model simulations generally show a greater seasonal variation, especially in the tropics In general the simulations errors in soil moisture resemble those in precipitation, and vary considerably among models, as is evident liom the zonally averaged June-August data (Figure 4 12) The simulations ovei Euiasia and northern Africa aie quite close to the “observed” in most models Howevei the zonally averaged data and also companson with the USSR data (e g , Table 4 1), suggests that some

models become too dry in summer in middle latitudes All models have difficulty with the extent of the aridity over Australia, especially in the (southern) summer

In summary, the limited soil moisture data available show that the simulated middle latitude summer and winter distributions qualitatively reflect most of the observed large-scale characteristics However, there are large differences in the models’ simulations of soil moisture, as expected lrom the precipitation simulations, and it should be emphasized that the representation (and validation) of soil moisture in current climate models is still relatively ci ude

(a) DJF PRECIPITATION: OBSERVED

Figure 4.11: Precipitation (mm day1) for December-January-February (a, b, c, d) and June-July-August (e, f, g, h); observed (Jaeger, 1976) (a, e) and CCC model (No. 20) (b, f), GFHI model (No. 21) (c, g) and UKHI model (No. 22) (d, h) (see Table 3.2(a) for model reference numbers).

(a) JJA PRECIPITATION: OBSERVED

(f) JJA PRECIPITATION: CCC

(g> JJA PRECIPITATION: GFH1

(h) JJA PRECIPITATION: UKHI

Figure 4.11 (continued)

Table 4.1 Aveiages of available soil moistme as percentage of capacity foi 30 60°E as observed (Vinnikov and Yesei keposa 1990) estimated from obseisations (Mintz and Seiafini 1989) and foi thiee models (CCC, GFHI and UKHI)foi Decembei Febiuaiy (DJF) and June August (JJA)

Model or Data	Vinnikov & Yeserkepova		Mintz &  Serafim		CCC		GFHI		UKHI	
Seasons	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA
62°N	100	100	100	55	>90	88	56	54	93	97
58°N	100	98	97	41	>90	85	32	22	90	93
54°N	85	57	83	27	78	77	25	13	81	67
50“N	63	24	57	12	35	22	28	10	70	30

NOTE The capacities vary between the data sets For Mintz and Serafim and GFHI, they are 15cm For UKHI, there is no fixed capacity, but the runoff parameterization leads to an effective capacity close to 15cm, as used for the above results CCC and Vinnikov and Yeserkepova have larger capacities, their data were provided as actual fractions of capacity

ESTIMATED

20 -i+--f GFLO

18 - X	X UKLO

----- NCAR

----- GFHI

UKHI

16 -

0 -I-------1-------1------1-------1-------1-------1------1------1-------1-------1

90	75	60	45	30	15	0	-15	-30	-45	-60

LATITUDE

Figure 4.12: Zonally averaged soil moisture (cm) for land points as estimated by Mintz and Serafim (1989) for July and as modelled tor June-July-August

4.3.4	Snow Cover

Snow is an important climate element because of its high reflectivity for solar radiation and because of its possible involvement in a feedback with temperature The correct simulation of snow extent is thus critical for accurate prediction of the response to increasing greenhouse gases

Snow cover observations used for model validation were a 15 year satellite-derived data set of the frequency of cover (Matson et al, 1986) and an earlier snow depth data set (Arctic Construction and Frost Effects Laboratory, 1954) These observations document the expected maximum snow

cover in the Northern Hemisphere winter, with Southern Hemisphere snow confined mainly to Antarctica

Detailed assessments of the simulations, especially for seasons other than winter, are hindered by the different forms of the model data (mostly seasonal mean liquid water content) and the observed data (either frequency of cover or maps of depth at ends of months) While all models capture the gross features of the seasonal cycle of snow cover, some models exhibit large errors Otherwise, except over eastern Asia where snow extents are mostly excessive (consistent with the low simulated temperatures (e g , Figure 4 9)), the models’ average winter snow depths can be near those observed, this is illustrated for North America in Figure 4 13, which compares the observed 5cm snowdepth contour at the end of January with the modelled lcm liquid water equivalent contour averaged for December to February Comparable results are obtained over Europe and western Asia

In summary, several models achieve a broadly realistic simulation of snow cover Provided snow albedos are

----OBSERVED	+ + GFDL ----GFDL HIGH	x x UKMO

Longitude

Figure 4.13: Winter snow cover over North America as defined for various models by the minimum latitude at which the December-Januaiy February simulated snow cover had a I cm liquid watei equivalent contour, and as observed by the minimum latitude of the end-ot-January aveiage 2 inch (5 cm) depth contoui (GFDL HIGH = GFHI, UKMO HIGH = UKHI GFDL = GriO UKMO = UKLO)

realistic, the simulated snow extent should thus not distort simulated global radiative feedbacks However, there are significant errors in the snow cover on regional scales in all models

4.3.5	Sea-Ice

An accurate simulation of sea-ice is important for a model’s ability to simulate climate change by virtue of its profound effect on the surface heat flux and radiative feedbacks in high latitudes An attempt is made to ensure a good simulation of sea-ice extent by including a prescribed ocean heat flux in many current models, this flux is assumed to be unchanged when the climate is perturbed Without it, models tend to simulate excessive temperature gradients between pole and equator, particularly in the Northern Hemisphere winter, with a consequent excess of sea-ice Sea-ice in the Arctic Ocean is constrained to follow the coast in winter, but in summer and autumn the ice separates from the coast in many places, this behavioui is simulated by some models Experiments with relatively sophisticated dynamic-thermodynamic sea-ice models (Hibler, 1979, Hibler and Ackley, 1983, Owens and Lemke, 1989) indicate that a realistic simulation of sea-ice variations may require the inclusion of dynamic eflects, although the optimal representation for climate applications has not yet been determined Although the thickness of seaice is not readily validated due to the inadequacy of observational data, models display substantial differences in simulated sea-ice thickness

In summary, considerable improvement in the representation of sea ice is necessary before models can be expected to simulate satisfactorily high-latitudc climate changes

4.3.6	Clouds and Radiation

The global distribution of clouds has been analysed from satellite data ovei recent yeais in ISCCP, and the diagnosed cloud cover can be compared with modelled cloud Foi example, Li and Letreut (1989) showed that the patterns of cloud amounts in a 10-day foiccast were similar to those diagnosed in ISCCP over Africa in July, but were deficient over the southeast Atlantic However, the definition of cloud may differ from model to model and between model and observations so, as discussed by Li and Letreut, it is often easier and more satisfactory to compare measuiablc radiative quantities A useful indication of cloud cover can be obtained fiom top-of-the-atmosphcrc satellite meas urements of the outgoing longwave radiation (OLR) and planctaiy albedo, as provided by Nimbus 7 Earth Radiation budget measurements (Hartmann et al , 1986 Ardanuy et al 1989) These quantities describe the exchange of energy between the whole climate system (ocean, ground ice and atmosphcie) and outer space, and in that sense constitute the net fotcing of the climate At the same lime

Figure 4.14: Zonally averaged OLR (Wm_2) for December-January-February (models) and for January (observed, Nimbus-7 NFOV)

LATITUDE

Figure 4.15: Zonally averaged planetary albedo for December-January-February (models) and for January (observed, Nimbus-7 NFOV)

they depend critically on many mechanisms that are internal to the climate system, and in particular the hydrological cycle As a result, the ability ot models to simulate the OLR and planetary albedo properly depends not only on the algonthms used to compute the radiative tiansleis within the atmosphere but also on the simulated snow cover, surlace temperature and clouds

The zonally averaged OLR (Figuie 4 14) is dominated by maxima in low latitudes and minima in high latitudes

Clouds generate minimum OLR near the tropical convergence zones, which are also evident as maxima in the albedo (Figure 4 15) The increase in albedo toward high latitudes, on the other hand, can be associated with clouds, snow and ice, or changes in land surface type and solar zenith angle

Because ol the important radiative effects ol clouds and their association with precipitation, observed tropical and subtropical OLR extremes are highly correlated with those

of piecipitation In general, in tropical regions the models’ OLR values are realistic, and models successfully simulate the correlation of precipitation with planetary albedo At higher latitudes in winter, there is considerable dispanty among models in the simulated values ol planetary albedo, evidently due to the differing simulations of snow cover and/or clouds and the different specifications of albedo for particular surfaces or cloud types In general, the models simulate polar OLR minima which are below the observed values, probably because of the temperature errors there (Figure 4 4, 4 8) Apart from these high latitude regions, the zonally averaged OLR is generally within 20 Wm 2 of the observed The mean error magnitudes for individual models are as low as 5 Wtrr- (Model 20, Table 3 2(a)) or 2% of the climatological values For absorbed solar radiation, errors are mostly below 20 Wm-- with albedo errors less than 0 1 except in northern middle and high latitudes

In summary, this assessment has shown that although the latitudinal variation of top of the atmosphere radiative parameters can be well simulated, there are some discrepancies, particularly in the albedo in middle and high latitudes due to the sensitivity of the parameterization schemes Most models underestimate the OLR in high latitudes

4.4	Simulation of the Regional Seasonal Cycle

The seasonal cycle constitutes the largest regularly observed change of the atmosphere-ocean system, and provides an important opportunity for model validation In general, all GCMs simulate a recognizable average seasonal variation of the principal climate variables, as measured by the phase and amplitude of the annual harmonic The seasonal variation of the amplitudes ol the transient and stationary waves can also be simulated with reasonable fidelity (eg the GLA GCM see Stiaus and Shukla, 1988 and Section 4 2 1)

A moie detailed summaiy of GCMs simulations of the seasonal cycle and a comparison with obseivational estimates for live selected legions is given in Table 4 2 in terms of the suiface air tempeiatuie and piecipitation In this statistical summary, each model s gnd-point data ovci land areas within the selected region have been averaged without mteipolation oi area-weighting, the aieas aie bounded as follows Region 1 (35 50N, 85 105W), Region 2 (5-3ON 70-105E), Region 3 (10-20N, 20W-40E), Region 4 (35-5ON, 10W-45E), Region 5 (10 45S, 110 155E) Similar areas are used in analysing regional changes in Section 5

4.41 Surf ace Air Temperature

The surface tempeiature data in Table 4 2 aie toi the bottom model layer except for the CCC model lot which

//5 an estimate ol screen temperature at 2m was supplied For the UKMO models, 00GMT data were adjusted to daily means using detailed data lor selected points The differences between the model simulations are generally much larger than those between the observed data sets, with the best agreement among the models’ surface air temperature occurring over southeast Asia in summer, and the poorest agreement over the Sahel in winter In general, the seasonal differences for each of the regions show that the models are, on average, capable of a good representation of the seasonal variation of surface air temperature

The magnitudes of the average errors of the individual models lie in the range 2 6±0 8°C, with larger values in winter (3 1°C) than in summer (2 1°C) For the high resolution models, the average is 2 3°C These figures may be compared with the mean seasonal variation of 15 5°C There appears to be no surface air temperature bias common to all the models, although the models with higher resolution (of the eight assessed) show an average temperature below that observed Average regional errors are generally small, with only southeast Asia in winter having a mean error ( 2 6°C) of more than 1 5°C, the models average estimates of the seasonal range are within 1°C of that observed for each region except southeast Asia

In summary, climate models simulate the regional seasonal cycle of surface air temperature with an error of 2 to 3°C, though this eiror is in all cases a relatively small fraction of the seasonal temperature range itself

4.4.2	Precipitation

Average values of the simulated and observed precipitation over the five regions are presented in Table 4 2 Most models succeed in identifying southeast Asia in summer as the wettest and the Sahel in winter as the driest seasonal precipitation regimes of those assessed, the region and season which gives the most difficulty appears to be southeast Asia in winter where several of the models are much too wet Indeed, all four northern winter validations reveal a pieponderance of positive errors and Australia also tends to be too wet The mean magnitude of model ciioi vanes quite widely between models, from 0 5 to 1 2 mm daj‘1, oi liom 20 to 50% of the observed the three higher resolution models have the smallest mean errors The relatively large differences among the models indicate the difficulty of accurately simulating precipitation in a specilic legion (even on a seasonal basis), and underscores the need for improved parameterization of precipitation mechanisms

In summary as for temperature, the range of model skill in simulating the seasonal precipitation is substantial the mean enors being from 20% to 50% of the average precipitation The models tend to overestimate precipitation in wintei

Table 4.2 Regional unweighted averages of seasonal surface air temperature (°C, upper portion) and precipitation (mm day-1, lower portion) as simulated in model control runs and as observed over five selected regions (see text). Here DJF is December-January-February and JJA is June-July-August (see Table 3.2(a) for model identification, where different from Figure 4.1).

Model  or  Data	Region 1 Gt. Plains		Region 2  S E Asia		Region 3  Sahel		Region 4  S Europe		Region 5 Australia	
	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA
CCC	-8.4	21.2	10.9	25.3	13.5	27.5	2.3	20.7	26.9	11.3
NCAR (#6)	-3.5	29.9	10.5	27.4	25.2	31.8	2.3	26.4	29.3	17.0
GFDLR15(#8)	-5.7	25.9	14.1	27.3	25.9	31.7	2.0	26.7	31.9	16.1
GFHI	-7.3	23.7	9.0	25.5	18.3	26.0	-3.8	20.9	24.9	11.8
GISS	-1.2	19.5	14.7	25.4	21.3	28.6	7.5	22.9	26.5	14.3
OSU (#3)	-4.8	20.4	13.9	28.2	30.5	32.8	-1.0	20.2	30.7	22.4
UKLO	-1.7	19.5	17.7	25.8	26.0	26.9	3.7	20.1	25.2	16.3
UKHI	-11.4	20.2	13.1	25.2	21.1	28.5	-2.0	18.5	25.5	15.3
Oort	-6.3	20.8	16.2	25.9	22.7	28.8	1.5	20.8	27.3	15.3
Schutz	-7.7	22.1	15.0	25.6	22.1	28.2	0.3	21.9	27.6	14.4
CCC	1.4	3.8	2.0	8.6	0.1	2.9	2.4	1.7	2.0	0.8
NCAR (#6)	1.6	1.0	3.1	9.3	0.5	4.3	2.9	0.8	3.4	2.7
GFDL R15 (#8)	1.9	3.3	3.3	9.5	1.0	3.9	2.8	1.1	2.3	2.5
GFHI	1.3	2.1	1.6	8.6	0.5	4.5	1.6	1.4	2.9	1.0
GISS	2.0	3.1	5.9	6.0	0.9	3.2	3.0	2.0	2.6	1.6
OSU (#3)	1.4	1.7	0.8	1.4	0.2	1.5	2.2	1.1	1.3	0.9
UKLO	1.2	4.0	1.5	4.1	0.3	3.8	2.2	3.5	3.0	0.8
UKHI	1.0	2.7	0.5	4.3	0.0	2.8	2.8	1.5	4.1	1.0
Jaeger	1.1	2.5	0.6	9.0	0.1	4.4	2.1	2.0	2.4	0.8
Schutz	■1.1	2.4	0.6	6.3	0.2	3.4	1.7	1.8	2.1	1.1

4.5	Simulation of Regional Climate Anomalies

4.5.1	Response to El Nino SST Anomalies

The El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon is now recognized to be an irregular oscillation of the coupled occan/atmosphere system in the tropical Pacific, occurring approximately every three to five years. During the peak of an El Nino, sea surface temperatures (SSTs) in the

eastern tropical Pacific can be several degrees warmer than the climatological mean. The convective rainfall maximum is shifted towards the warm SST anomalies, and the associated anomalous latent heat release forces changes in the large scale atmospheric circulation over the Pacific basin (and this in turn helps to maintain the anomalous SST). In addition, there is evidence that the extratropical

120E	140E	160E	180	160W	140W	120W	100W	80W	60W	40W

Figure 4.16: Sea surface temperature anomaly (°C) for January 1983 Dashed contours are negative (Fennessy and Shukla 1988b)

120E	140E	160E	180	160W	140W	120W	100W SOW 60W	40W

120E	140E	160E	180	160W	140W	120W	100W SOW 60W	40W

Figure 4.17: Anomalies of mean convective precipitation (mm day ') from mid-December 1982 to mid February 1983 (a) Observed, (b) Simulated Observed precipitation anomalies are calculated from OLR data, simulated anomalies are the average of three 60-day integrations with the Goddard Laboratory for Atmospheres GCM starting from 15, 16 and 17 December (Fennessy and Shukla, 1988b)

jet streams are significantly displaced from their climatological positions during strong El Nino events, particularly over the North Pacific and North America (Fennessy and Shukla, 1988a)

Before the capability of coupled atmosphere/ocean GCMs to simulate El Nino and its teleconnections can be assessed, it is first necessary to assess whether the atmospheric component of these models can respond realistically to observed SST anomalies There has been

considerable research on this problem in recent years as part of the WCRP TOGA programme (see for example, Nihoul, 1985, WMO, 1986, 1988) following Rowntree's (1972) initial studies Figure 4 16 shows the SST anomaly in the Pacific for January 1983, with a maximum of 4°C in the eastern Pacific An example of the observed and simulated precipitation anomalies from mid-December 1982 to mid-February 1983 is shown in Figure 4 17 (Fennessy and Shukla, 1988b), where a close corr espondence across the central and eastern Pacific as well as over Indonesia and northern Australia can be seen The observed and simulated anomalies in the zonal departure of the 200mb stream function for this same period are shown in Figure 4 18 The strong anticyclonic couplet straddling the equator in the central and eastern Pacific and the weaker couplet to the east in the tropics are well simulated in the model though their magnitudes are too weak In the extratropics over the Pacific and North America, an eastward-shifted PNA-like pattern (Wallace and Gutzler, 1981), with cyclonic anomaly over the North Pacific and anticyclonic anomaly over Canada, is present in both the observed and simulated anomaly fields

While the results above indicate that atmospheric GCMs can respond realistically to El Nino SST patterns, comparison of different GCMs' responses to identical SST anomalies underscores the importance of a realistic model control climate (Palmer and Mansfield, 1986) For example, the responses ol models to an identical El Nino SST anomaly arc significantly different in those regions where the models control climates differ markedly In such experiments there are also errors in the simulated anomalous surface heat flux and wind stress, which would give rise to quite different SST if used to force an ocean model

Comparative extended-range forecast experiments using initial data from the El Nino winter of 1982/3 with both observed and climatological sea surface temperatures, showed that in the tropics the use of the observed SST led to consistent improvements in forecast skill compared with runs with climatological SST, while in the extratropics the improvements were more variable (WMO, 1986) These results suggest that, in the winter-time extratropics, the internal low-frequency variability of the atmosphere is as large as the signal from tropical forcing by El Nino, while in the tropics the influence ol the El Nino forcing is dominant

In summary, we may conclude that, given a satisfactory estimate of anomalous SST in the tropical Pacific, atmospheric GCMs can provide a realistic simulation of seasonal tropical atmospheric anomalies at least for intense El Nino episodes This success serves to increase our confidence in these models and in their response to surface forcing Problems associated with climate drift, particularly in relation to fluxes at the ocean-atmosphere interface.

90S ________i_______i______i_______i_______I______i_______i-------L

0	40E	80E	120E	160E	160W	120W	80W	40W	0

90S ________I_______I_______I_______I_______I_______I_______I_______I_______

0	40E	80E	120E	160E	160W	120W	80W	40W	0

Figure 4.18: Mean departure from the zonal mean of anomalies of the 200 hPa stream-function (lO^nA-'). Dashed contours are negative. Other details as in Figure 4.17. (Upper panel shows observed, lower panel shows simulated).

however, have so far inhibited consistently successful El Nino prediction with coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs, although recent simulations have reproduced some aspects of observed El Nino phenomena (Sperber et al., 1987; Meehl, 1990).

4.5.2	Sahelian Drought

Over much of the 1970s and 1980s, sub-Saharan Africa experienced persistent drought, while in the 1950s rainfall was relatively plentiful. Climate models have been useful in determining the mechanisms responsible for the drought, although the successful prediction of seasonal rainfall anomalies requires further model development.

Figure 4.19: Simulated and observed Sahel rainfall in the six years for which simulations have been made Simulations were made both with climatological and interactive soil moisture in the UKMO GCM (version not shown in Table 3 2(a)) (Folland, 1990 - personal communication)

A number of GCM studies have indicated that local changes in land surface conditions have an important influence on rainfall For example, Charney et al (1977), Sud and Fennessy (1982) and Laval and Picon (1986) have shown that an increase in land albedo over the Sahel can inhibit rainfall, while Rowntree and Sangster (1986) have shown that restriction of soil moisture storage (as well as albedo increases) can also have a substantial impact on rainfall in the Sahel Other experiments indicate that the climate of the Sahel is sensitive to changes in local vegetation cover

Further GCM experimentation has been described by Folland et al (1989), the UKMO GCM has now been run from observed initial conditions in March and forced with the observed SST for seven months of each of 1950, 1958, 1976, 1983, 1984 and 1988 (Folland, personal communication) For each of these years, two experiments were performed one with an interactive soil moisture parameterization, and one with fixed climatological soil moisture Figure 4 19 shows a comparison of the observed and simulated rainfall over the Sahel It is clear that the decadal time-scale trend in Sahel rainfall has been well captured Moreover, the results suggest that soil moisture feedback is not the main cause of the large modelled differences in ram between the wet and dry years, though it does contribute to the skill of the simulations Insofar as these decadal timescale fluctuations in large-scale SST are associated with internal variability of the ocean atmosphere system, it would appear that Sahel drought is part of the natural variability of the climate, although the physical mechanisms whereby SST influences Sahel ram clearly involve remote dynamical processes (Palmer. 1986)

In summary, atmospheric model experiments exhibit an ability to simulate some of the observed interannual variations in Sahel rainfall, given the correct SST patterns

4.5.3	Summer Monsoon

The monsoon, especially the Asian monsoon, displays significant seasonal variation and mterannual variability, and the onset and retreat of the summer monsoons in Asia and Australia are associated with abrupt changes in the atmospheric general circulation (Yeh et al, 1959, McBride, 1987) An earlier or later monsoon onset, or a longer or shorter duration, usually causes flood or drought Therefore, not only the accuracy of the seasonal monsoon precipitation but also the accuracy of the monsoon timing are important aspects of a model’s ability to simulate regional climate anomalies

In general, most atmospheric GCMs simulate the gross features of summer monsoon precipitation patterns though there are significant deficiencies (see Section 4 3 2), although this aspect of model performance has not been extensively examined, some models have been shown to simulate the monsoon onset and associated abrupt changes (Kitoh and Tokioka, 1987, Zeng et al , 1988) Part of the mterannual variability of the summer monsoon has been found to be associated with anomalies in SST, both local (Kershaw, 1988) and remote For example, there is an apparent correlation between the strength of the Indian monsoon and SST in the eastern tropical Pacific, in the sense that a poor monsoon is generally associated with a warm east Pacific (Gregory, 1989)

4.6	Simulation of Extreme Events

The occurrence of extreme events is an important aspect of climate, and is in some respects more important than the mean climate Many relatively large-scale extreme events such as intense heat and cold, and prolonged wet and dry spells, can be diagnosed from climate model experiments (e g , Mearns et al , 1984) The ability of climate models to simulate smaller-scale extreme events is not well established, and is examined here only in terms of tropical storm winds and small-scale severe storms

Krishnamurti and Oosterhof (1989) made a five-day forecast of the Pacific typhoon Hope (July 1979) using a 12-layer model, with different horizontal resolutions At a resolution of 75 km the model's forecast of strong winds was close to the observed maximum, while with a resolution of 400 km the maximum wind was less than half of the correct value and was located much too far from the centre of the storm Since most climate models have been run with a resolution of 300 km or more they do not adequately resolve major tropical storms and their associated severe winds It may be noted, however, that by using appropriate criteria, Manabe et al (1970),

Haarsma et al (1990), and Broccoli and Manabe (1990), have reported that climate models can simulate some of the geographical structure that is characteristic of tropical cyclones

Neither models with resolutions of 300 - 1000 km nor current numerical weather prediction models simulate individual thunderstorms, which are controlled by mesoscale dynamical processes However, they do simulate variables that are related to the probability and intensity of severe weather such as thunderstorms, hail, wind gusts and tornadoes If the appropriate variables are saved from a climate model, it should therefore be possible to determine whether the frequency and intensity of severe convective storms will change in an altered climate

In summary, while changes in the occurrence of some types of extreme events, such as the frequency of high temperatures, can be diagnosed directly from climate model data, special techniques are needed for inferring changes in the occurrence of extreme events such as intense rainfall or scvcie local windstorms

A BCD EFG	H

a> ■o

3

to

90N

60N

30N

0

30S

60S

90S

___I__I II III I

V	, •	500	200 mb	-g-'

2 ‘

1 ■ ‘

_____i______	 1982 1983___1984	1985	1986	1987	1988	1989

Year

Figure 4.20: Zonal and vertical means (500-200 hPa) of zonal wind errors (forecast-analysis) of ECMWF day-10 forecasts Contours drawn from seasonal mean values at intervals of 1 ms‘l (zero line suppressed) The lettering at the top of the diagram indicates times of major model changes

4.7	Validation from Operational Weather Forecasting

As was recognized at the outset of numerical modelling, the climatological balance of a weather forecast model becomes of importance after a few days of prediction, while an extension of the integration domain to the whole globe becomes necessary This means that modelling problems in numerical weather prediction (NWP), at least in the medium and extended range, have become similar to those in modelling the climate on timescales of a few months (Bengtsson, 1985)

The development of numerical models over the past several decades has led to a considerable improvement in forecast skill This advance can be seen in the increased accuiacy ot shoit-range predictions, in the extension of the time lange of useful predictive skill, and in the increase in the number of useful lorecast products A systematic evaluation of the quality ol short range foiecasts in the Northern Hemisphere has been earned out by the WMO/CAS Working Group on Weather Prediction Research coveting the l()-year period 1979	1988 (Lange

1989) Under this intercompanson project operational forecasts fiorn several centres have been verified on a daily basis, consideiable improvement has taken place, esp ecially in the tropics and in the Southern Hemisphere (Bengtsson, 1989)

Of paiticular importance for climate modelling aie model errors of a systematic (or case-independent) nature Such model deficiencies give rise to a climate drift in which the model simulations generally develop significant differences ttom the real climate Although there has been a progressive reduction of systematic errors in NWP models as noted above a tendency to zonali/ation of the

flow is still present Figure 4 20 shows the evolution of 10day errors of the zonal wind component tn the ECMWF model, and illustrates the global character of the model's errors (Arpe, 1989) The systematic errors typical of forecast models include the tendency for reduced variability in large-scale eddy activity, which shows up synoptically as a reduction in the frequency of blocking and quasi-stationary cut-off lows (see also Section 4 2 4)

In summary, the development and sustained improvement of atmospheric models requires long periods of validation using a large ensemble of different weather situations Confidence in a model used for climate simulation will therefore be increased if the same model is successful when used in a forecasting mode

4.8	Simulation of Ocean Climate

The ocean influences climate change on seasonal, decadal and longer timescales in seveial important ways The large-scale transports of heat and fresh water by ocean currents are important climate parameters, and affect both the overall magnitude as well as the regional distribution of the response ol the atmosphere-ocean system to greenhouse warming (Spelman and Manabe, 1985) The circulation and thermal structure of the upper ocean control the penetration of heat into the deeper ocean and hence also the timescale by which the ocean can delay the atmospheric response to CO2 increases (Schlesinger et al , 1985) Vertical motions and water mass formation processes in high latitudes are controlling factors (besides chemical and biological interactions) for the oceanic uptake of carbon dioxide

through the sea surface, and thus influence the radiative forcing in the atmosphere To be a credible tool lor the prediction of climate change, ocean models must therefore be capable of simulating the present circulation and water mass distribution, including their seasonal variability

4.8.1	Status of Ocean Modelling

The main problems in ocean modelling arise from uncertainties in the parameterization of unresolved motions, from insufficient spatial resolution, and from poor estimates of air-sea fluxes In general, ocean modelling is less advanced than atmospheric modelling, reflecting the greater difficulty of observing the ocean, the much smaller number of scientists/institutions working in this area, and the absence until recently of adequate computing resources and of an operational demand equivalent to numerical weather prediction Global ocean models have generally followed the work by Bryan and Lewis (1979), they mostly have horizontal resolutions of several hundred kilometres and about a dozen levels in the vertical Coarse grid models of this type have also been used in conjunction with atmospheric GCMs for studies of the coupled oceanatmosphere system (see Section 4 9)

The performance of ocean models on decadal and longer timescales is critically dependent upon an accurate parameterization of sub-gridscale mixing The main contribution to poleward heat tiansport in ocean models arises from vertical overturning whereas the contribution associated with the horizontal circulation is somewhat smaller Most models undeiestimate the heat transpoit and simulate western boundary currents which aie less intense and broader than those obseived The need for eddyresolving models (eg, Semtner and Chervin, 1988) in climate simulations is not yet established Coarse vcitical resolution, on the othei hand can significantly alter the effective mixing and thus influence the overturning and heat transport in a model The main thermocline in most coarse-resolution simulations is considciably waimci and more diffuse than observed a result probably due to a deficient representation of lateial and vertical mixing

An important component of the deeper ocean cuculation is driven by fluxes of heat and fresh watei at the sea surface In the absence of reliable data on the surface iluxes of heat and fresh water, many ocean modellers have parameterized these in terms of obseived sea surface temperature and salinity The fluxes diagnosed in this way vary considerably among models While surface heat flux and surface temperatuic aie strongly related there is no correspondingly strong connection between surface fresh water flux and surface salinity a consequence is the possible existence of multiple equilibrium states with significant differences in oceanic heat tianspoit (Manabe and Stouffer, 1988)

4.8.2	Validation of Ocean Models

The distribution of temperature, salinity and other water mass properties is the primary information for the validation of ocean models Analysed data sets (e g , Levitus, 1982) have been very useful although the use of original hydrographic data is sometimes preferred The distributions of transient tracers, in particular tri-tium/hehum-3 and C-14 produced by nuclear bomb tests, and CFCs, place certain constraints on the circulation and are also useful diagnostics for model evaluation (Sarmiento 1983, Toggweiler et al , 1989) The poleward transport of heat in the ocean zonal hydrographic sections (c g the annual mean of 1 0-1 2 PW at 25N in the North Atlantic found by Bryden and Hall, 1980) appeals to have high reliability, and zonal sections planned in the World Ocean Circulation Experiment could significantly improve ocean heat transpoit estimates

Direct observations of the fluxes of heat, fresh water and momentum at the sea surface are not very accurate, and would not appear to be viable in the near future However monitoring upper ocean parameters, in particular the heat and fresh water content in connection with ocean circ ulation models, can contribute to an indirect determination of the surface fluxes The validation ol ocean models using large data sets can in general be made more efficient if appropriate inverse modelling and/or data assimilation procedures are employed

The validation of ocean models may conveniently be considered separately on the time-scales of a season, a decade and a century The goal is a model which will conectly sequester excess heat produced by greenhouse warming and produce the right prediction of changing sea surface temperatures when it is run in coupled mode with an atmospheric model

Seasonal timescales in the uppei ocean aie important for a simulation of greenhouse warming both because seasonal variations aie a fundamental component of climate and because ol the seasonal variation of vertical mixing in the ocean Sarmiento (1986) has demonstiated that the seasonal vanation of mixed layer depths can be simulated with a suf 1 iciently detailed repiesentation ol the upper ocean

Pei haps the best way to check ocean models on decadal time scales is to simulate the spread of ti ansient tiaceis Data sets based on these tracers provide a unique pictuie ol the downward paths from the surface into the ocean thermocline and deep water The invasion of tritium into the western Atlantic about a decade aftei the peak of the bomb tests is compared with calculations by Sarmiento (1983) in Figure 4 21 The data show that the tntium very rapidly invades the main thermocline but only a small Faction gets into deep water The model succeeds in repioducing many ol the important features of the data such as the shallow equatorial penetration and the deep penetration in high latitudes The main failure is the lack of

Figure 4.21: Tritium in the GEOSECS section in the western North Atlantic approximately one decade after the major bomb tests (a) GEOSECS observations, (b) as predicted by a 12-level model (Sarmiento, 1983) In Tritium units

Latitude

penetration at 30-50°N, which may be related to some inadequacy in simulating cross-Gulf Stream/North Atlantic Current exchange (Bryan and Sarmiento, 1985) A notable result is the importance of seasonal convection for vertical mixing An obvious difficulty in using transient tracer data to estimate the penetration of excess heat from greenhouse warming is the feedback caused by changes in the density field A very small temperature perturbation should behave like a tracer, but as the amplitude increases, the perturbation will affect the circulation (Bryan and Spelnran 1985)

In many parts of the ocean, salinity is an excellent tracer of ocean circulation The salinity field of the ocean is extiemely difficult to simulate The reason for this is that souices and sinks of fresh water at the ocean surface have a rather complex distribution, much more so than the transient tracers Water masses with distinctive salinity signatures lie at the base of the thermocline in all the major oceans In the Southern Ocean and the Pacific, these water masses are characterized by salinity minima and relatively weak stability The characteristic renewal timescale of these water masses is greater than a decade but less than a century a range very important for greenhouse warming At pi esent, these water masses have not been simulated in a satisfactory way in an ocean circulation model

In summary, oceanic processes are expected to play a majoi role in climate change The satisfactory rep lesentation of vcitical and horizontal transport processes (and of sea-ice) are thus of particular importance There is encouraging evidence from tracer studies that al least some aspects of these mixing processes are captuied by ocean

models However, at present, ocean models tend to underestimate heat transport

4.9	Validation of Coupled Models

While much has been learned from models of the atmosphere and ocean formulated as separate systems, a more fundamental approach is to treat the ocean and atmosphere together as a coupled system This is unlikely to improve on the simulation of the time-meaned atmosphere and ocean when treated as separate entities (with realistic surface fluxes), since the average SST can only become less realistic, however, it is the only way in which some of the climate system’s long-term interactions, including the ti ansient response to progressively increasing CO2, can be realistically studied (see Section 6)

Typical of the current generation of coarse-gnd coupled GCMs is the simulation shown in Figure 4 22 from Washington and Meehl (1989) The general pattern of zonal mean temperature is reproduced in both atmosphere and ocean in this freely interacting coupled model, although during the time period simulated the temperature in the deeper ocean is still strongly related to the initial conditions On closer inspection, comparison of the simulated near-surfacc temperatures in the ocean with observed values from Levitus (1982) shows warmer-than-observed temperatures in the high latitude southern oceans, colder-than-observed temperatures in the tropics, and coldcr-than-observed temperatures at high northern latitudes The latter can be traced to the North Atlantic where the lack of a well-defined Gulf Stream and associated thermohaline circulation inhibits the transport of

OCGM

Figure 4.22: Zonal mean temperatures for December-January February for atmosphere and ocean as simulated in a 30 year integration with (left) the NCAR coupled model (Washington and Meehl, 1989) and (right) from observations Observed atmospheric temperatures are from Newell et al (1972) observed ocean temperatures are from Levitus (1982) The unlabelled contour in the observed near the tropical surface is 295K The maximum ocean temperatures in this same region are 27°C (observed) and 25°C (computed)

a>

heat to those latitudes Similar patterns of systematic seasurface temperature errors have been found in other coupled models (Gates et al , 1985, Manabe and Stouffer 1988), and their effects on the simulated surface heat flux have been examined by Meehl (1989)

In view of such errors, a practical decision faces those designing coupled models On the one hand they can decide that the systematic errors, while serious in teims of the control integration do not prevent the useful interpretation of results from sensitivity experiments On the other hand, they may considci that the systematic eirors represent a significant bias in the control run and would affect the results of sensitivity experiments to an unacceptable degree The alternative then is to somehow adjust for the errors in the control run to piovide a more realistic basic state for sensitivity experiments Such techniques have been devised and aic variously called flux correction” (Sausen et al 1988) or flux adjustment (Manabe and Stouffer, 1988) These methods eflectivcly remove a large part of the systematic eriors and such coupled simulations are closei to observed conditions However, since the correction lei ms are additive the coupled model can still exhibit dnft and the flux collection

terms cannot change during the course of a climate change experiment (i e , it is effectively assumed that the model errors are the same for both the control and perturbed climates)

One way to validate coupled models is to analyse the simulated interannual variability, a fundamental source of which is associated with the El Nino - Southern Oscillation (ENSO) (see also Section 4 5 1) The current generation of coarse-gnd coupled models has been shown to be capable of simulating some aspects of the ENSO phenomenon (Sperberetal 1987 Meehl 1990 Philander et al 1989) although the simulated intensity is in general too weak Ultimately a coupled climate model should be venfied by its simulation of the observed evolution of the atmosphere and ocean over historical times For hypothetical future iatcs of CO2 increase current coupled GCMs at least indicate that the patterns of the climate s transient response are likely to be substantially different in at least some ocean regions from those given in equilibrium simulations without a fully intciacting ocean (Washington and Meehl 1989 Stouffer et al , 1989 see also Section 6)

In summaiy coupled models of the ocean atmospheic system aie still in an early stage of development and have

so far used relatively coarse resolution Nevertheless, the large scale structures of the ocean and atmosphere can be simulated with some skill using such models and current simulations give results that are generally similar to those of equilibrium models (see Sections 5 and 6)

4.10	Validation from Palaeo-Climate

Studies of palaeo-climatic changes are an important element in climate model validation for two reasons

1)	they improve our physical understanding ol the causes and mechanisms of large climatic changes so that we can improve the representation of the appropriate processes in models, and

2)	they provide unique data sets for model validation

4.10.1	Observational Studies of the Holocene

The changes of the Earth’s climate during the Holocene and since the last glacial maximum (the last 18,000 years) are the largest and best documented in the palaeo climatic record, and are therefore well-suited for model validation, the data sets aic ncai-global in distnbution, the time control (based upon radiocarbon dating) is good, and estimates of palaeo-climatic conditions can be obtained from a variety ol palaeo-environmental records, such as lake sediment cores, ocean sediment cores, ice cores, and soil cores At the last glacial maximum there were large ice sheets in North Amenta and northern Eurasia, sea-level was about l()()m below present, the atmospheric CO2 concentration was around 200ppm, sea-ice was more extensive than at present, and the patterns of vegetation and lake distribution were different from now During the last 18,000 years, we

therefore have the opportunity to observe how the climate system evolved during the major change from glacial to piesent (inteiglacial) conditions CLIMAP Project Members (1976 1981) and COHMAP Members (1988) have assembled a comprehensive data set for the climate of the last 18,000 years as summanzed in Figure 4 23

The period from 5 5-6kbp (thousand years before present) is probably the earliest date in the Holocene when the boundary conditions of ice-sheet extent and sea level were analogous to the present There is also general agreement that vegetation was close to equilibrium with the climate at this time Radiocarbon dating of most of the sources of stratigraphic data allows an accuracy of better than plus-or-minus 1000 years in the selection of data for the purposes of making reconstructions The earlier period around 9kbp is of particular inteiest because the differences ol the radiative forcing fiom the present were particularly large (Berger, 1979), although there was still a substantial North Amencan ice sheet

410.2	Model Studies of Holocene Climate

Several atmospheric GCMs have been used to simulate the climate of the 18kbp glacial maximum, and have helped to clarify the relative roles ol continental ice sheets, sea-ice, ocean temperature and land albedo in producing major shifts in circulation, temperature and precipitation patterns (Gates, 1976a, b, Manabe and Hahn, 1977, Kutzbach and Guetter, 1986, Rind 1987) In addition to specifying landbased ice sheets and changed land albedos, these models also prescribed SSTs and sea-ice extents Manabe and Broccoli (1985) successfully simulated the SSTs and seaice during the Last Glacial Maximum using an atmospheric GCM coupled to a mixed-layer ocean model, this

Figure 4.23: Data sites in the CLIMAP/COHMAP global palaeo-climatic data base (COHMAP Members, 1988)

SPRUCE POLLEN (as observed)

SPRUCE POLLEN (as simulated by GCM output)

18 kbp 15 kbp 12 kbp 9 kbp	6 kbp	3 kbp	0 kbp

Figure 4.24: Maps showing observed (upper row) and simulated (lower row) percentages of spruce pollen for each 3000-yeai interval from 18,000 YBP to the piesent The region with diagonal lines in the north is a digital representation of the location of the Lauicntide ice sheet Area of spruce abundance as determined by spruce pollen is shown by dark stippling for >20%, intermediate stippling for 5 to 20%, and light stippling for I to 5% Simulation values were produced by applying the observed (present) association between spruce pollen and climatic variables to the temperature and precipitation values simulated by the climate model (From COHMAP Members, 1988)

experiment also demonstrated the sensitivity of glacial age climate simulations to the lowered level of glacial-age atmospheric CO2 (Broccoli and Manabe. 1987) The climate's sensitivity to oibital parameter changes has been confirmed through compai isons of model simulations with palaeo-climatic data both using atmospheric GCMs (Kutzbach and Guettei, 1986. Royer et al 1984) and using atmospheric GCMs coupled to mixed layer ocean models (Kutzbach and Gallimoie 1988, Mitchell et al , 1988) Manabe and Stouffei (1988), moicover. icport evidence ol two stable equilibria of a coupled atmosphere-ocean GCM that may be of impollance for explaining abiupt short-teim climate changes such as the cooling which occuned about 10,500 years ago Rind et al (1986) Oveipecketal (1989) and Oglesby et al (1989) have sought undeistanding of this cooling from model expeiintents in which cooling of the North Atlantic or the Gulf of Mexico was specified

In general, palaeo-climate modelling studies have found encouraging agieement between simulations and observations on continental scales F01 example, the COHMAP comparisons using the NCAR model show temperature and precipitation changes, ISkbp to piesent, that are generally consistent with obseivations in North America, at least as intcrpieted b_\ the movement ol spruce populations (Figure 4 24), while the simulated enh ancement of northern tropical monsoons around 9kbp is also supported by palaeo-climatic data (COHMAP Membeis, 1988) On the othei hand, palaco-climatc

modelling studies, like their modern counterparts, also reveal regions and times where model and data disagree For example, Figure 4 24 shows errors over southeastern North America from 18 to 12kbp associated with simulated summer temperatures that are too high, while Manabe and Broccoli (1985) obtain laiger cooling of the tropical oceans at 1 Skbp than palaeo-climatic data suggest

Because the mid-Holocene may have been wanner than now at least dunng northern summei. the question anses whethei or not this period might be in some sense analogous to the climate with doubled CCb Gallimore and Kutzbach (1989) and Mitchell (1990) have discussed the diffeicnccs in forcing (orbital parameteis versus CO2) and difieiences in the climatic response as simulated by GCMs Even though the two types of forcing aie veiy different, we can leant a gicat deal about 0111 models by detcimining how well model expenments with orbitally-causcd changes in solai iadiation simulate the observed extent of increase in noithern mid continent summer warmth and dryness the decrease tn Arctic sea-ice, and the increase in northern tropical precipitation

4.10.3	Other Validation Opportunities

Studies of the previous interglacial around 125kbp by CL1MAP Pioject Membeis (1984) and Picll and Kutzbach (1987) among otheis show evidence for wanner conditions, especially in high latitudes, reduced sea-ice extent, and enhanced northern tropical monsoons At this

time CO2 levels were above pre-industrial levels, sea-level was somewhat higher than now, the Greenland ice sheet was perhaps smaller, and orbital parameters favoured greatly enhanced Northern Hemisphere seasonality Because of the indications of warmth and relatively high CO2 levels (relative to before and after 125 kbp) this pcnod is also of interest for modelling and model validation studies Modelling experiments by Royer et al (1984) have emphasised the strong cooling from the equilibrium climate with orbital parameters for 125kbp to that for 115kbp However, data sets are not nearly as extensive or as well-dated as for the mid-Holocene

There is strong evidence that the first growth of ice sheets and the development of glacial/interglacial cycles began in North America and northern Eurasia around 2 4 million years ago, prior to this time the climate was presumably significantly warmer than at present This period may well be our only geologically-recent example of a climate that was significantly warmer than now over large areas However, the period poses many problems, including the marked differences from the present day in major global topographic features and the uncertainties in forcing conditions, these factors make it unsuitable for detailed model validation at the present time, although such simulations would be of considerable scientific interest

In summary, palaeo-climatic data have provided encouraging evidence of the ability of climate models to simulate climates diflerent from the present, especially during the Holocene This indicates that further such data would be useful for climate model validation

4.11	Conclusions and Recommendations

This somewhat selective review of the performance of current global climate models has shown that there is considerable skill in the simulation of the present day climate by atmospheric general circulation models in the portrayal ol the large-scale distribution of the pressure, temperature, wind and precipitation in both summer and winter As discussed in Section 4 1 2 the responses to pciturbations can be given credence, provided simulated and observed patterns are sufficiently similar for conesponding features and mechanisms to be identified Recent models appear to satisfy this condition over most of the globe Although quantification of this conclusion is difficult it is supported by the skill demonstrated by atmospheric models in simulating, firstly, the circulation and lainfall changes associated with the El Nino ocean temperature anomalies and, secondly, the rainfall anomalies characteristic of wet and dry periods in the Sahel region of Africa when the observed sea surface temperature anomalies arc used

On icgional scales there are significant errors in these variables in all models Validation for selected regions

shows mean surface air temperature errors of 2 to 3°C, compared with an average seasonal variation of 15°C The large-scale distribution of precipitation can be realistically simulated apart lrom some errors on sub-continental scales (1000 2000 km) whose locations differ between models Validation on these scales for selected regions shows mean errors of from 20% to 50% of the average rainfall depending on the model

The limited data available show that the simulated summer and winter soil moisture distributions in middle latitudes qualitatively reflect most of the large-scale characteristics of observed soil wetness Snow cover can be well simulated in winter except in regions where the temperature is poorly simulated The radiative fluxes at the top of the atmosphere, important for the response of climate to radiative perturbations, are simulated with average errors in the zonal mean as small as 5 Wnr^ There are, however, substantial discrepancies in albedo, particularly in middle and high latitudes

There has been a general reduction in the errors in more recent models as a result of increased resolution, changes in the parameterization of convection, cloudiness and surface processes, and the introduction of parameterizations of gravity wave drag In addition to the conclusions drawn from the validation of atmospheric model control simulations, our overall confidence in the models is increased by their relatively high level of accuracy when used for short and medium-range weather prediction, by their portrayal of low-frequency atmospheric variability such as the atmospheric response to realistic sea surface temperature anomalies (also referred to above), and by their ability to simulate aspects of the climate at selected times during the last 18,000 years Further confidence in atmospheric models would be obtained by their successful simulation of the climate changes shown by the observed instrumental record

Other opportunities for validation not considered in detail here include the simulation of variations in stratospheric temperature and circulation Models have been successful in simulating the impact on temperatures of the Antarctic ozone hole (Kiehl et al, 1988, Canolle et al, 1990), although they have not successfully simulated the quasi-biennial oscillation in stratospheric wind and temperature

The latest atmospheric models, while by no means perfect, are thus sufficiently close to reality to inspire some confidence in their ability to predict the broad features of a doubled CO2 climate at equilibrium, provided the changes in sea-surface temperature and sea-ice are correct The models used in simulating the equilibrium responses to increased greenhouse gases employ simple mixed-layer ocean models, in which adjustments to the surface fluxes have usually been made to maintain realistic present day sea-surlace temperatures and sea-ice in the control

experiments Our confidence in the ability of these models to simulate changes in the climate, including ocean temperatures and sea-ice, is enhanced by their successful simulation of aspects of the climates during and since the most recent ice age

Despite the present computational constraints on resolution, the performance of ocean models lends credence to our ability to simulate many of the observed large-scale features of ocean climate, especially in lower latitudes However, coupled ocean-atmosphere models exhibit characteristic errors which as yet can only be removed by empirical adjustments to the ocean surface fluxes This is due in part to the use of atmospheric and oceanic models of relatively low resolution, and in part to inadequate parametenzations of fluxes at the air-sea interface Nevertheless, the latest long runs with such models, discussed in Section 6, exhibit variability on decadal timescales which is similar to that observed (compare Figure 6 2 and Figure 7 10)

There is a clear need for further improvement of the accuracy of climate models through both increased resolution and improved parameterization of small-scale processes, especially the treatment of convection, clouds and surface effects in atmospheric GCMs, and mixing and sea-ice behaviour in oceanic GCMs Much further experience needs to be gamed in the design of coupled models in order to avoid the equally unsatisfactory choices of accepting a progressive climatic drift or of empirically correcting the behaviour of the upper ocean These improvements and the associated extended simulations will require substantial amounts of computer time, along with increased coordination and cooperation among the world’s climate modelling community Data from satellite programmes, such as EOS, and from field experiments are needed to provide more complete data sets for specifying land surface characteristics, for initialisation and validation of ocean simulations and to improve parametenzations Of particular value should be ERBE ISCCP and FIRE data for radiation and cloud, the ISLSCP and the HAPEX lor land surface processes, the GEWEX lor energy and water balances, and WOCE and TOGA data for the oceans

The validation of a number of atmospheric model variables has been handicapped by limitations in the available observed and model data In particular, future model assessments would benefit from improved estimates of precipitation and evaporation over the oceans, and of evaporation, soil moisture and snow depth over land, and by more uniform practices in the retention of model data such as snow-cover frequency and depth, and daily nearsurface temperature extremes or means The genet ation of data suitable for validating cloud simulations deserves continuing attention, as does the assembly ol palaco-chmatic data sets appropriate for climate model validation over the Earth’s recent geological history The lack ot

appropriate data has also severely hindered the validation ol ocean models Adequate data on the seasonal distribution of ocean currents and their variability and on salinity and sea-ice thickness are especially needed

Although the ten year atmospheric data set lor 1963-73 compiled by Oort (1983) and the oceanographic set assembled by Levitus (1982) have been of great value in model assessment, the subsequent availability of 4 dimensional assimilation techniques and the expansion of observing platforms provide the opportunity for considerably improved data sets Indeed, many data sets now used by modellers for validation have been produced by global forecasting centres as a by-product of their operational data assimilation, although changes in forecast and assimilation techniques have led to temporal discontinuities in the data The proposal by Bengtsson and Shukla (1988) for a re analysis of observations over a recent decade (e g , 1979-1988) with a frozen up-to-date assimilation system is therefore of great potential value for climate model validation If carried out over additional decades, such a data set could also contribute to our understanding of how to distinguish between natural climate fluctuations and changes caused by increased greenhouse gases

References

Arctic Construction and Frost Effects Laboratory, 1954 Depth of snow cover tn the Northern Hemisphere New England Division Corps of Engineers, Boston, Mass

Ardanuy, P E , L L Stowe, A Gruber, M Weiss and C S Long 1989 Longwave cloud radiative forcing as determined from Nimbus-7 observations J Clim , 2, 766 799

Arkin P A , and P E Ardanuy, 1989 Estimating climatic scale precipitation from space a review J Clim 2 1229-1238

Arkin P A and B N Meisner 1987 The relationship between large scale convective rainfall and cold cloud over the western hemisphere during 1982-1984 Mon Wcath Rtt 115 51 74

Arpe K 1989 Systematic errors of the ECMWF model ECMWF Internal Report SAC (89)

Bengtsson L 1985 Medium range forecasting at the ECMWF Ad\ Gtoph 28 3 54

Bengtsson L 1989 Numerical weather prediction at the Southern Hemisphere Third International Conference on Southern Hemisphere Meteorology and Oceanography Buenos Aires, Argentina November 13 17 1989

Bengtsson L and J Shukla 1988 Integration ol space and in Mln observations to study global climate change Bull Amu Me tun Sot 69 1130-1143

Berger A 1979 Insolation signatures of Quaternai} climatic changes IINnmo Cimcnto 20(1) 63 87

Boer G J and M La/are 1988 Some results concerning the effect of horizontal iesolution and gravity wave drag on simulated climate / Clim 1 789 806

Broccoli A J and S Manabe, 1987 The influence of continental ice atmospheric CO2 and land albedo on the climate ot the last glacial maximum Chm Dyn 1, 87-99

Broccoli, A J and S Manabe. 1990 Will global wanning increase the frequency and intensitv ot tropical csclones1 (submitted for publication)

Bryan, K , and L J Lewis, 1979 A water mass model ot the world ocean J Geophys Res, 84 2503 2sp

Bryan, K and J L Sarmiento 1985 Modelling ocean circulation In Issues in atmospheric and oceanic modelling (Part A) (Ed S Manabe), Ads Gcophss 28 433-459

Bryan, K and M J Spelman. 1985 The oceans response to a CO2-induced warming / Geophss R< s 90 11679-11688

Bryden, H L , and M Hall 1980 Heat transport be currents across 25N latitude in the Atlantic Ocean Science 207 884 885

Cariolle D , A Lasserre-Bigorry J F Rover and J F Geleyn 1990 A general circulation model simulation of the springtime Antarctic ozone decrease and its impact on mid-latitudes J Geophys Res ,95, 1883-1898

Charney J G,W J Quirk, S H Chow, and J Komteld 1977 A comparative study of the effects of albedo change on drought in semi arid regions I Atmos Sc 1 34 1366-1385

CLIMAP Project Members, 1976 The surface of the ice age Earth Science, 191, 1131-1136

CLIMAP Project Members, 1981 Seasonal reconstructions of the Earths surface at the last glacial maximum Geological Soc lets oj Amei ic a Map and Chai t Sei les MC 36

CLIMAP Project Members, 1984 The last interglacial ocean Quai Res 21,123-224

COHMAP Members, 1988 Climatic changes of the last 18 000 years Observations and model simulations Science 241 1043 1052

Dorman C E , and R H Bourke, 1979 Precipitation over the Pacific Ocean, 30°S to 60°N Mon Wea Res , 107 896 910

Dyson J F 1985 The effect of resolution and diffusion on the simulated climate Research Activities in Atmospheric and Oceanic Modelling, Report No 8, WGNE, WMO Geneva pp 44 46

Fennessy MJ and J Shukla, 1988a Numerical simulation of the atmospheric response to the time-varying El Nino SST anomalies during May 1982 through October 1983 I Chm , 1, 195 211

Fennessy M J , and J Shukla 1988b Impact of the 1982/3 and 1986/7 Pacific SST anomalies on time mean prediction with the GLAS GCM WCRP 15, WMO, pp 26 44

Folland C K J A Owen and K Maskell 1989 Physical causes and predictability of variations in seasonal rainfall over sub-Saharan Africa IAHS Publ No 186,87-95

Gallimore, RG, and JE Kutzbach, 1989 Effects of soil moisture on the sensitivity of a climate model to Earth orbital forcing at 9000 yr BP Climatic Chant’e, 14, 175 205

Gates WL, 1976a Modeling the ice age climate Science 191, 1138-1144

Gates W L , 1976b The numerical simulation of ice-age climate with a global general circulation model / Atmos Sc 1 33, 1844 1873

Gates, W L,Y J Han, and M E Schlesinger, 1985 The global climate simulated by a coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation model Preliminary results In Nihoul, J C J (ed ), Coupled Oc ean-Atmosphei e Models, Elsevier Oceanogr Ser 40, 131-151

Gregory, S , 1989 Macro-regional definition and characteristics of Indian summer monsoon rainfall, 1871-1985 Int J Chm , 9, 465 483

Haarsma, R , J F B Mitchell and C A Senior, 1990 Tropical cyclones in a warmer climate (submitted for publication)

Hansen, J G Russell, D Rmd, P Stone, A Lacis, S Lebedeff, R Ruedy and L Travis, 1983 Efficient three-dimensional global models for climate studies Models I and II Mon Wea Res 111 609 662

Hartmann, D L , V Ramanathan, A Berroir and G E Hunt, 1986 Earth radiation budget data and climate research Rev Geopliy s , 24, 439-468

Hibler, W D III 1979 A dynamic thermodynamic sea ice model J Phys Oceanosp ,9,815-846

Hibler, W D III, and S F Ackley, 1983 Numerical simulations of the Weddell Sea pack ice I Geophys Res , 88, 2873 2887

Jaeger, L , 1976 Monatskarten des Niederschlags fur die ganze Erde Beiicht Deutsche/ Wetteidienst, 18, Nr 139, 38pp

Katz, R W , 1988 Statistical procedures for making inferences about changes in climate variability J dim , 1, 1057-1068

Kershaw R 1988 The effect of a sea surface temperature anomaly on a prediction of the onset of the south-west monsoon over India Quait J R Meteoi Soc 114,325-345

Kiehl, J T , B A Boville and B P Briegleb, 1988 Response of a general circulation model to a prescribed Antarctic ozone hole Native 332,501 504

Kitoh, A and T Tokioka, 1987 A simulation of the tropospheric general circulation with the MRI atmospheric general circulation model, Part III The Asian summer monsoon J Meteoi Soc lapan 65 167 187

Krishnamurti T N , and D Oosterhof, 1989 Prediction of the life cycle of a supertyphoon with a high resolution global model Bull Amei Meteoi Soc ,70,1218 1230

Kutzbach, JE, and PJ Guetter, 1986 The influence of changing orbital parameters and surface boundary conditions on climate simulations for the past 18,000 years J Atmos Sa , 43, 16, 1726 1759

Kutzbach JE, and RG Gallimore, 1988 Sensitivity of a coupled atmosphere/mixed layer ocean model to changes in orbital forcing at 9000 yr BP I Geophys Rev, 93, 803-821

Lange A , 1989 Results of the WMO/CAS NWP data study and intercomparison project for forecasts for the Northern Hemisphere in 1988 World Meteorological Organization, World Weather Watch, Technical Report No 7

Laval, K and L Picon, 1986 Effect of a change of the surface albedo of the Sahel on climate J Atmos Sci , 43, 2418 2429

Levitus, S , 1982 Climatological Atlas of the World Ocean NOAA Professional Paper 13, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Washington, DC, 173 pp, 17 microfiche

Li, Z -X and Letreut H , 1989 Comparison of GCM results with data from operational meteorological satellites, Ocean An fnteiactions, 1, 221-237

Live/ey, R E , 1985 Statistical analysis of general circulation model climate simulations Sensitivity and prediction experiments I Atmos Sa 42, 1139 1149

Manabe, S and A J Broccoli, 1985 A comparison of climate model sensitivity with data from the Last Glacial Maximum / Atwws 5</,42,2643 2651

Manabe, S , and D G Hahn, 1977 Simulation of the tropical climate of an ice age J Geophys Res 82,3889-3911

Manabe, S , and R J Stouffer, 1988 Two stable equilibria of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model / Chm , 1, 841-866

Manabe, S , D G Hahn and J L Holloway, 1978 Climate simulations with GFDL spectral models of the atmosphere Report of the JOC Study Conference on Climate Models Performance, Intercomparison and Sensitivity Studies, GARP Publications Series No 22, Vol 1 41 94 WMO, Geneva

Manabe, S , J L Holloway and H M Stone 1970 Tropical circulation in a time integration of a global model of the atmosphere / Atmos Sc i , 27, 580 613

Matson, M , C F Ropelewski and M S Vamadore, 1986 An Atlas of Satellite-Derived Northern Hemisphere Snow Cover Frequency U S Govt Printing Office Publ 1986 151 384, NOAA

McBride, J L , 1987 The Australian summer monsoon In Monsoon Meteoi oloqy Oxford University Press, 203 232

Mearns, L O , R W Katz and S H Schneider 1984 Extreme high temperature events changes in their probabilities with changes in mean temperature J Chm Appl Met, 23 1601 1613

Mearns, L O , S H Schneider, S L Thompson and L R McDaniel, 1990 Analysis of climate variability in general circulation models comparison with observations and changes in variability in 2 x CO2 experiments (submitted for publication)

Meehl, G A , 1989 The coupled ocean-atmosphere modeling problem in the tropical Pacific and Asian monsoon regions / Chm 2,1122-1139

Meehl, G A , 1990 Seasonal cycle forcing of El Nino Southern Oscillation in a global coupled ocean-atmosphere GCM I Chm 3,72-98

Mint/, Y , and Y V Serafim, 1989 Global monthly climatology of soil moisture and water balance LMD Internal Report No 148, LMD, Paris

Mitchell, J F B,1990 Greenhouse warming Is the Holocene a good analogue’ I Chm (in press)

Mitchell, JFB, NS Grahame, and KH Needham 1988 Climate simulations for 9000 years before present Seasonal variations and the effect of the Laurentide Ice Sheet, J Geophys Res , 93, 8283 8303

Mitchell, J F B,CA Wilson and W M Cunnington, 1987 On CO2 climate sensitivity and model dependence of results Q J R Meteoi Soc , 113, 293 322

Newell, R E,J W Kidson, D G Vincent, and G J Boer, 1972 The General Circulation of the Tropical Atmosphere and Interactions with Extra Tropical Latitudes Vol 1 , MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 258 pp

Nihoul, J C J (Ed ), 1985 Coupled ocean atmosphere models Elsevier Oceanography Series 40, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 767pp

Oglesby, RJ, KA Maasch and B Saltzman 1989 Glacial meltwater cooling of the Gulf of Mexico GCM implications for Holocene and present day climates Chm Dsn 3 115-133 Oort, A H , 1983 Global atmospheric circulation statistics 1958-1973 NOAA Professional Paper 14, U S Department of Commerce

Overpeck, J T , L C Peterson N Kipp, J Imbrie, and D Rind 1989 Climate change in the circunt North Atlantic region during the last deglaciation Native, 338, 553-557

Owens, W B and P Lemke, 1989 Sensitivity studies with a sea ice - mixed layer pycnocline model in the Weddell Sea / Geophs s Res (in press)

Palmer, T N , 1986 Influence of the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans on Sahel rainfall Nairne 322,236-238

Palmer, T N , and D A Mansfield 1986 A study of wintertime circulation anomalies during past El Nino events using a high resolution general circulation model I Influence ol model climatology Quail I R Meteoi Soc ,112,613 638

Philander, S G H N C Lau, R C Pacanowski M J Nath 1989 Two different simulations of Southern Oscillation and El Nino with coupled ocean-atmosphere general circulation models Phil Tians Ros Soc , in press

Prell, W L , and J E Kutzbach 1987 Monsoon variability over the past 150 000 years J Geophys Res, 92, 8411 8425

Reed, D N 1986 Simulation of time series of temperature and precipitation over eastern England by an atmospheric general circulation model / Climatology, 6, 233 253

Rind, D 1987 Components of the Ice Age circulation / Geophys Res 92,4241 4281

Rind, D , D Peteel,W Broecker, A McIntyre, and W Ruddiman 1986 The impact of cold North Atlantic sea surtace temperatures on climate Implications for the Younger Dryas cooling (11 10K) Chm Dsn 1,3 34

Rind D , R Goldberg and R Ruedy 1989 Change in climate variability in the 21st century Climatic Change, 14, 5 37

Rowntree P R and A B Sangster 1986 Remote sensing needs identified in climate model experiments with hydrological and albedo changed in the Sahel Proc ISLSCP Conference Rome, Italy, ESA SP-248, 175-183

Rowntree, PR , 1972 The influence of tropical east pacific ocean temperatures on the atmosphere Quail I R Meteoi Soc 98 290 -312

Royer, J F M Deque and P Pestiaux, 1984 A sensitivity experiment to astronomical forcing with a spectral GCM Simulation of the annual cycle at 125 000 BP and 115 000 BP In -Milankmitch and Climate, (A Berger J Imbrie J Hays G Kukla, and B Saltzman, eds ), Part 2, Reidel Publ , Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp 801-820

Santer, B D and T M L Wigley, 1990 Regional validation of means, variances and spatial patterns in general circulation model control runs J Geophys Res (in press)

Sarmiento, J L , 1983 A simulation of bomb-tntium entry into the Atlantic Ocean J Phys Oceanoqi 13, 1924-1939

Sausen, R , R K Barthels, and K Hasselmann 1988 Coupled ocean-atmosphere models with flux correction Chm Dsn 2 154-163

Schlesinger M E,W L Gates, and Y -J Han, 1985 The role of the ocean in carbon-dioxide induced climate warming Preliminary results from the OSU coupled atmosphere ocean model In Coupled Ocean Atmospheie Models, J C J Nihoul (ed ), Elsevier, 447 478

Schutz, C and W L Gates, 1971 Global climatic data for surface, 800 mb, 400 mb January Rand, Santa Monica, R 915-ARPA, 173 pp

Schutz, C and W L Gates, 1972 Global climatic data for surface, 800 mb, 400 mb July Rand, Santa Monica, R 1029 ARPA, 180 pp

Semtner, A J , and R Chervin, 1988 A simulation ot the global ocean circulation with resolved eddies 7 Geophss Res , 93, 15, 502-15, 522

Shukla, J , and Y Mintz, 1982 Influence of land surface evapotranspiration on the Earth’s climate Science, 215, 1498 1501

Slingo, A and D W Pearson, 1987 A comparison of the impact of an envelope orography and of a parameterization of orographic gravity wave drag on model simulations Quait J R Meteoi Soc , 113, 847 870

Spelman. M J , and S Manabe, 1985 Influence of oceanic heat transport upon the sensitivity of a model climate J Geophys Res, 89 571 586

Sperber, K R , S Hameed, W L Gates, and G L Potter, 1987 Southern Oscillation simulated in a global climate model N unite 329 140 142

Stouffer, R J , S Manabe, and K Bryan, 1989 Interhemispheric asymmetry in climate response to a gradual increase of atmospnenc CO2 Natm e, 342, 660-662

Straus D M and J Shukla, 1988 A comparison of a GCM simulation of the seasonal cycle of the atmosphere with observations Atmos Ocean, 26, 541 604

Sud Y C and M Fennessy 1982 A study of the influence of surface albedo on July circulation in semi and regions using the GLAS GCM J Clim , 2, 105-125

Tibaldi S , T Palmer, C Brankovic, and U Cubasch, 1989 Extended-range predictions with ECMWF models II Influence of horizontal resolution on systematic error and forecast skill rCMWF Technical Memot andum , No.152, 39 pp

I’oggweiler J R K Dixon and K Bryan, 1989 Simulations of radiocarbon in a coarse-resolution world ocean model, 2 Distributions of bomb-produced carbon 14 J Geophss Res, 94 8243 8264

Trenberth, K E and J G Olson 1988 ECMWF global analyses 1979-86 Circulation statistics and data evalation NCAR Technical Note NCAR/TN 300+STR, 94pp plus 12 fiche Vinnikov K Ya and I B Yeserkepova, 1990 Soil moisture empirical data and model results (submitted for publication) Wallace J M . and Gutzler D S 1981 Teleconnections in the geopotential height field during the northern hemisphere winter Mon Wea Res ,109,784-812

Washington W M and G A Meehl, 1989 Climate sensitivity due to increased CO2 Experiments with a coupled atmosphere and ocean general circulation model Clim Dsn , 4 1-38

WGNE 1988 Proceedings of the Workshop on Systematic Errors in Models of the Atmosphere Toronto, 19-23 September 1988 CAS/JSC Working Group on Numerical Experimentation WNN/TD No 2 & 3, 382 pp

Wigley, T M L , and B D Santer, 1990 Statistical comparison of spatial fields in model validation, perturbation and predictability experiments J Geophys Res (in press)

Wilson, C A , and J F B Mitchell, 1987 Simulated climate and CO2 induced climate change over western Europe Climatic Change, 10, 11-42

WMO, 1986 Workshop on Comparison of Simulations by Numerical Models of the Sensitivity of the Atmospheric Circulation to Sea Surface Temperature Anomalies WMO/TD-No 138, WCP-121, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, 188 pp

WMO, 1988 Modelling the Sensitivity and Variations of the Ocean-Atmosphere System WMO/TD-No 254, WCRP-15, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, 289 pp

Yeh, T C , S Y Tao and M C Li, 1959 The abrupt change of circulation over the Northern Hemisphere during June and October In The Atmosphete and the Sea in Motion, 249-267

Zeng, Qing-cun et al , 1988 Numerical simulation of monsoon and the abrupt change tn atmospheric general circulation Chinese Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, Special Issue.

5

Equilibrium Climate Change - and its Implications for the Future

J. F. B. MITCHELL, S. MANABE, V. MELESHKO, T. TOKIOKA

Contributors:

A.	Baede; A. Berger; G. Boer; M. Budyko; V. Canuto; H. Cao; R. Dickinson;

H. Ellsaesser; S. Grotch; R. Haarsma; A. Hecht; B. Hunt; B. Huntley;

R. Keshavamurty; R. Koerner; C. Lorius; M. MacCracken; G. Meehl; E. Oladipo;

B.	Pittock; L. Prahm; D. Randall; P. Rowntree; D. Rind; M. Schlesinger; S. Schneider;

C.	Senior; N. Shackleton; W. Shuttleworth; R. Stouffer; F. Street-Perrott; A. Velichko; K. Vinnikov; D. Warrilow; R. Wetherald.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary

5.1	Introduction

5 1 1 Why Carry Out Equilibrium Studies 9

5 1 2 What are the Limitations of Equilibrium Climate Studies 9

5 1 3 How Have the Equilibrium Experiments Been Assessed 9

5.2	Equilibrium Changes in Climatic Means due to Doubling CO2

5 2 1 The Global Mean Equilibrium Response

5 2 2 What are the Large-Scale Changes on Which the Models Agree 9

5 2 2 1 Temperature changes

5 2 2 2 Precipitation changes

5 2 2 3 Soil moisture changes

5 2 2 4 Sea-ice changes

5 2 2 5 Changes in mean sea-level pressure

5 2 2 6 Deep ocean circulation changes

5.3	Equilibrium Changes in Variability due to Doubling CO2

5 3 1 Temperature

5 3 11 Day-to-day variability

5 3 12 Interannual variability

135

137

137

137

137

138

138

139

139

143

146

157

150

151

152

152

152

153

5 3	13 Diurnal range of temperature	153

5 3 2	Precipitation	153

5 3 3	Winds and Disturbances	153

5.4	Regional Changes - Estimates for 2030	155

54	1	Introduction	155

5 4 2	Limitations of Simulated	Regional Changes	155

5 4 3 Assumptions Made in Deriving Estimates

for 2030	155

5 4 4 Estimates of Regional Change, Pre-industrial to 2030 (IPCC "Business-as Usual Scenario)	157

5.5	Empirical Climate Forecasting	158

5 5 1 Introduction	158

5 5 2 Results	158

5 5 2 1 Temperature	158

5 5 2 2 Precipitation	158

55	3 Assessment of Empirical Forecasts	158

5.6	The Climatic Effect of Vegetation Changes	159

5 6 1 Introduction	159

5 62 Global Mean Effects	160

5.6	3 Regional Effects Deforestation of Amazonia	160

5.7	Uncertainties	160

References	162

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. All models show substantial changes in climate when CO2 concentrations are doubled, even though the changes vary from model to model on a sub-continental scale.

Soil moisture:

***

**

increases in high latitudes in winter;

decreases over northern mid-latitude continents in

2. The main equilibrium changes in climate due to doubling CO2 deduced from models are given below. The number of *'s indicates the degree of confidence determined subjectively from the amount of agreement between models, our understanding of the model results and our confidence in the representation of the relevant process in the model. Five *'s indicate virtual certainties, one * indicates low confidence.

summer.

Snow and sea-ice:

[fog area of sea.lce an(j seasonal snow-cover diminish.

Temperature:





***

***

***

the lower atmosphere and Earth's surface warm,

the stratosphere cools;

near the Earth's surface, the global average wanning lies between +1.5°C and +4.5°C, with a "best guess" of 2.5°C, the surface warming at high latitudes is greater than the global average in winter but smaller than in summer (In time dependent simulations with a deep ocean, there is little warming over the high latitude southern ocean);

the surface warming and its seasonal variation aie least in the tropics.

The results from models become less reliable at smaller scales, so predictions for smaller than continental regions should be treated with great caution. The continents warm more than the ocean Temperature increases in southern Europe and central North America are greater than the global mean and are accompanied by reduced precipitation and soil moisture in summer The Asian summer monsoon intensifies

3. Changes in the day-to-day variability of weather are uncertain However, episodes of high temperature will become more frequent in the future simply due to an increase in the mean temperature. There is some evidence of a general increase in convective precipitation

Precipitation:

****



***



**

**

the global average increases (as does that of evaporation), the larger the warming, the larger the increase; increases at high latitudes throughout the year;

increases globally by 3 to 15% (as does evaporation), increases at mid-latitudes in winter;

the zonal mean value increases in the tropics although there are areas of decrease. Shifts in the main tropical rain bands differ from model to model, so there is little consistency between models in simulated regional changes;

changes little in subtropical and areas.

4. The direct effect of deforestation on global mean climate is small. The indirect effects (through changes in the CO2 sink) may be more important. However, tropical deforestation may lead to substantial local effects, including a reduction of about 20% in precipitation.

5. Improved predictions of global climate change require better treatment of processes affecting the distribution and properties ol cloud, ocean-atmosphere interaction, convection, sea-ice and transfer of heat and moisture from the land surface Increased model resolution will allow more realistic predictions of global-scale changes, and some improvement in the prediction of regional climate change.

5.1	Introduction

5.7	J Why Carry Out Equilibrium Studies ?

Climate is in equilibrium when it is in balance with the radiative forcing (Section 3 2) Thus, as long as greenhouse gas concentrations continue to increase, climate will not reach equilibrium Even if concentrations are eventually stabilised at constant levels and maintained there, it would be many decades before full equilibrium is reached Thus equilibrium simulations cannot be used directly as forecasts Why carry out equilibrium studies9

First, approximate equilibrium simulations using atmosphere-oceanic mixed layer models which ignore both the deep ocean and changes in ocean circulation (Section 3, Section 6 44 1) require less computer time than timedependent simulations which must include the influence of the deep ocean to be credible

Second, equilibrium experiments are easier to compare than time-dependent experiments This, combined with the fact that they are relatively inexpensive to carry out, makes equilibrium simulations ideal for sensitivity studies in which the effect of using alternative parametenzations (for example, of cloud) can be assessed

Third, it appears that apart from areas where the oceanic thermal inertia is large, as in the North Atlantic and in high southern latitudes, equilibrium solutions can be scaled and used as approximations to the time-dependent response (see Section 6)

Most equilibrium experiments consider the effect of doubling the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide since the effect of increases in other trace gases can be calculated in terms of an effective CO2 increase (see Section 2) Note that only the radiative effects of increases in gases are taken into account, and not the effects of related factors such as deforestation and possible changes in cloud albedo due to sulphur emissions

Simulated changes in climate are known to be dependent on the simulation ol the undisturbed climate 1 (see, for example, Mitchell et al 1987) The simulation of present day climate is discussed in more detail in Section 4

5.1.2	What Are The Limitations Of Equilibrium Climate Studies ?

Firstly, most equilibrium studies use models which exclude possible changes in ocean circulation Nearly all the equilibrium studies which do allow changes in ocean circulation have been simplified in other ways such as ignoring the seasonal cycle of insolation (Manabe et al , 1990), or using idealised geography (Manabe and Bryan, 1985) The effects of the ocean and the differences between

1 Foi example // the snow line is misplaced m the simulation of present climate then the large warming assoc tated with the 1 etr eat of the snow line m ill be misplaced in the simulated c lunate c hangc

non-equihbrium and equilibrium climate simulations are discussed further in Section 6

Secondly, different areas of the world respond at different rates to the gradual increase in greenhouse gases Over most of the ocean, the response to the increase in radiative heating will be relatively rapid, as little of the extra heat will penetrate below the thermocline at about 500m (see Section 6) On the other hand, in parts of the northern North Atlantic and the high latitude southern ocean, particularly in winter, the extra heat will be mixed down to several kilometres, significantly reducing the rate of warming and consequently the warming reached at any given time In other words, the geographical patterns of the equilibrium warming may differ from patterns of the timedependent warming as it evolves in time This applies both to model simulations and palaeo-climatic analogues

5.7	3 How Have The Equilibrium Experiments Been Assessed 9

Over 20 simulations of the equilibrium response to doubling CO2 using general circulation models (GCMs) coupled to mixed-layer oceans have been carried out by 9 modelling groups (Table 3 2a) All those cited involved global models with realistic geography, a mixed layer ocean and a seasonal cycle of insolation The more recent studies include a prescribed seasonally-varying oceanic heating (Section 3) Models 13 20 and 21 in Table 3 2a also prescribe a heat convergence under sea ice Clearly it is not possible here to show results from all 20 or so experiments, so some way of condensing the available data must be chosen We have chosen not to average the results as there are aspects ol each model which are misleading Nor is it reasonable to choose a best model as a particular model may be more reliable than another lor one climatic parameter but not for another Moreover a result which is common to most models is not necessanly the most reliable - it may merely reflect the fact that many models use similar (possibly erroneous) representations of complex atmospheric processes

In this section, the climate changes which are common to all models and which are physically plausible are emphasised and illustrated by typical results Where there is disagreement among model results those which are probably unreliable (for example because of large errors m the simulation of present climate) have been eliminated and examples illustrating the range of uncertainty are included The reasons for the discrepancies (if known) arc stated and an assessment of what seems most likely to be the correct result in the light of current knowledge including evidence from time-dependent simulations (Section 6), is given

The contents of the remainder of this section are as follows First we consider the large-scale changes in

tempeialuie piecipitation and othci climatic elements in equilibrium simulations of the effect of doubling CCD, with the emphasis on new results Several comprehensive icviews have been published recently (lor example Dickinson 1986, Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1985,1987, Mitchell 1989) to which the reader is referred for further discussion of earliei studies The purpose here is to desciibe the changes and to assess the realism of the mechanisms producing them The possible changes in climatic variability are then discussed Next, we consider simulated seasonal mean changes from three different models in live selected regions These results have been scaled to give a best estimate of the warming which would occur at 2030 (at about the tune of effective doubling of CO2 in the IPCC Business-as-Usual Scenario This is followed by an assessment of lorecasts using the palaeo-analogue method and a review of attempts to model the dnect climatic effects of deforestation Finally, the mam unceitainties aie discussed

5.2	FLquilibrium Changes in Climatic Means Due to Doubling CCb

5.2.1	The Global Mean Equilibrium Response

All models show a significant equilibrium increase in global average surface temperature due to a doubling of CO2 winch ranges fiom 1 9 to 5 2°C (Table 3 2a) Most icsults lie between 3 5 and 4 5°C, although this does not necessaiily imply that the correct value lies in this range The mam uncertainty arises fiom the problems ol simulating cloud With no changes in cloud a warming of 2 to 3 C is obtained (Table 3 2a, entries 1 and 2 see also Hansen et al 1984 Schlesinger 1985) wheieas models in which cloud amount is calculated inteiactively from iclative humidity but in which radiative properties are fixed give a warming of 4 to 5°C (Table 3 2a entnes 3 to 16 21)

Even amongst those models which calculate cloud from iclative humidity there is a wide variation in sensitivity (Table 3 2a entnes 3 to 16 20 22) and cloud feedback (Cess ct al 1989 - Table 3 2a entnes 3 and 4 see also Section 3 4 4) Sensitivity also varies 101 many other icasons including the extent ol sea ice in the control climate (Table 3 2a, entries 11 and 12 Manabe and Stouflei 1980, Ingram et al, 1989)

Specifying cloud from relative humidity with fixed ladiativc properties ignores the possible ellects of changes in cloud microphysics, such as changes in total cloud watei content the partition between cloud ice and cloud water, and changes in the effective radius of cloud paitides Because of this attempts have been made to model cloud watei content explicitly (Roeckncr et al 1987 Smith 1990) Climate warming may produce an mciease in cloud watei content and hence in the idlcctivity of cloud (a

20

15 -

10

5

<u o> c CO JZ O

c o

<o

■w o. o o

CL

c

		15/16  V
		12
	11	4  • •
22  3 . 18. ’	8.  •	7/13/21
17. 6*	•  9	•  5
1 e 20 • 19 •		

6

2	3	4	5

Global Mean Warming (°C)

0

1

Figure 5.1: Percentage change in globally and annually averaged precipitation as a function of global mean warming from 17 models The numbers refer to the entries describing the models in Table 3 2a

negative feedback), but also an increase in the long-wave emissivity of cloud (increasing the greenhouse effect, a positive feedback especially for thin high cloud) Models disagree about the net eflect which depends crucially on the radiative properties at solar and infrared wavelengths One general circulation experiment (Mitchell et al 1989 -Table 3 2a entnes 18 and 19) and experiments with simple one-dimensional ladiative convective models (Somerville and Remer 1984 Somerville and Iacobelhs, 1988), suggest a negative feedback A further possible negative feedback due to increases in the proportion of water cloud at the expense of ice cloud has been identified (Table 3 2a, entries 16 17 Mitchell et al , 1989)

On the basis ol evidence from the more recent modelling studies (Table 3 2a entries 3 4, 7-9, 17-22) it appears that the equilibrium change in globally averaged surface temperatuie due to doubling CO2 is between 1 9 and 4 4°C The model icsults to not piovide any compelling reason to alter the previously accepted range 1 5 to 4 5°C (U S National Academy ol Sciences, 1979, Bolin et al, 1986) The clustcnng of estimates around 4°C (Table 3 2a, Figure 5 1) may be laigely due to the neglect of changes in cloud microphysics in the models concerned In the 2xCC>2 simulations in which some aspects of cloud microphysics are parameteri/cd (Table 3 2a, entries 17 20, 22), the warming is less than 4°C However, in idealised sim illations (Cess ct al 1990) changes in cloud microphysics pioduced positive feedbacks in some models and negative feedbacks in othcis Thus we cannot reduce the upper limit

of the range The modelling studies do not on their own provide a basis for choosing a most likely value

Dickinson (in Bolin et al , 1986) attempted to quantify the uncertainty in the sensitivity of global mean temperature ATs to doubling CO2 by considering the uncertainties in individual feedback processes as determined from climate model experiments The climate sensitivity parameter A (the reciprocal of that defined in Section 3 3 1) is the sum of the individual feedback strengths, and the range of ATs is deduced from the range of A through

ATs = AQ/A

where AQ is the change in radiative heating due to doubling CO2 (See Section 3 3 1) Repeating this analysis with revised estimates2 gives a range of 1 7 to 4 1°C The mid-range value of A gives a sensitivity of 2 4°C which is less than the mid-range value of ATs This is because for high sensitivity (small A), a given increment in A gives a bigger change in ATs than for low sensitivity Similarly, taking the value of A corresponding to the middle of the range of A implied by 1 5 to 4 5°C gives a value of 2 3°C for ATs

One can attempt to constrain the iange of model sensitivities by comparing predictions of the expected warming to date with obseivations This approach is fraught with uncertainty Global mean temperatures are subject to considerable natuial fluctuations (Section 7) and may have been influenced by external factors other than the greenhouse effect In paiticular the effect of aerosols on cloud (Section 2 3 3) may have suppiessed the expected waiming There is also some unceitainty concerning the extent to which the thermal inertia of the oceans slows the rate of warming (Section 6) Hence obseivations alone cannot be used to reduce the range of unceitainty though assuming that factors other than the gicenhouse effect remain unchanged, they are more consistent with a value in the lower end of the iange 1 5 to 4 5°C (Section 8 1 3)

The evidence from the modelling studies from obs eivations and the sensitivity analyses indicate that the sensitivity of global mean suilace icmpeiatuie to doubling COt is unlikely to he outside the iange 1 5 to 4 5°C There is no compelling evidence to suggest in what part of this range the correct value is most likely to lie There is no particular virtue in choosing the middle of the iange, and both the sensitivity analysis and the observational evidence

2 Matei sapoui and lapse /ate feedback 2 4^0 IWm ~K I

(Ras al and Ramanathan 1989) sui fat e albedo feedback 0	2 Wm - K I (Ini’/am et al 1989) cloud

feedback 0 l±0 7 Wm 2 K I (as oni’inalls estimated b\ Dickinson consistent with tant>e of ATs in Mitchell it al 1989) the sensitisits A = I 8 - 0 7 Wm 2 K 1 assumini> the enoi s aie independent of one anothu

neglecting factors othei than the greenhouse el feet indicate that a value in the lower part ol the iange may be more likely Most scientists declined to give a single number but for the purpose of illustrating the IPCC Scenarios, a value of 2 5°C is considered to be the best guess in the light of current knowledge.

The simulated global warming due to a doubling of CO2 is accompanied by increases in global mean evaporation and precipitation, ranging from 3 to 15% (Table 3 2a, Figure 5 1) In general, the greater the warming, the greater the enhancement of the hydrological cycle Since evaporation increases as well as precipitation mcieased precipitation does not necessarily imply a wetter land surface

5.2.2	What Are The Large-Scale Changes On Which The Models Agree ?

Although globally averaged changes give an indication of the likely magnitude of changes in climate due to increases in greenhouse gases, the geographical and seasonal distribution of the changes are needed to estimate the economic and social impacts of climate change Despite the large range of estimates for the global annual average warming there are several large-scale featuies of the simulated changes which are common to all models These aie outlined below Where appropriate Jesuits from the high resolution models (Table 3 2a, entnes 20 22) are quoted to give the leader a rough indication of the size of the changes

5	2 2 1 Tempei atm e changes

The results from equilibrium simulations shown here are aveiaged over periods of 5 to 15 years Because there is considerable inteiannual variability in simulated suiface temperatuies particularly in high latitudes in winter some of the smallei-scale features may be random fluctuations due to the short sampling period lathci than persistent changes due to doubling atmospheric CO2

/ All models pioduce a Mamuns’ of the Edith's suiface and ti opospliei e (lossei atmosphei e) and a cool ini’ of the stiateisphei e (Fispu e 5 2)

The warming of the surface and troposphere are due to an enhancement of the natural greenhouse effect The stratosphenc cooling is due to enhanced radiative cooling to space and increases with height, reaching 3 to 6°C at about 25 mb Note that the models considered have at most two levels in the tropical stratosphere and so cannot resolve the details of the stratospheric cooling Models with high icsolution produce a cooling of up to 1 1°C in the stratosphere on doubling CO2 (Fels et al 1980) The indirect effects of stratospheric cooling are discussed in Section 2 2 3 Note that other greenhouse gases (for

Latitude

Figure 5.2: Height latitude diagram of the zonally averaged change in air temperature due to doubling CO2 for the months of June, July and August in two models giving a global mean wanning of 4°C. Cooling, and wanning by > 4°C, stippled, (from Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1987): (a) with penetrative convection (Hansen et al, 1984), (b) with moist convection adjustment (Manabe and Wetherald, 1988).

example, methane, chlorofluorocarbons) produce a weak radiative warming of the stratosphere (Wang et al., 1990).

2.	All models produce an enhanced warming in higher latitudes in late autumn and winter (Figures 5.2, 5.3):

This enhancement of the warming in higher latitudes is the result of a variety of processes.

First, in the warmer 2 x CO2 climate, sea-ice forms later in autumn giving a pronounced warming in the Arctic (Figures 5.3, 5.4 a, b, c - see over page) and around Antarctica in the corresponding Southern Hemisphere season (Figures 5.3, 5.4 d, e, f - over page). (In high latitudes over the southern ocean, there is little or no wanning at any time of year in time-dependent simulations (Section 6)). The reduction in the extent of sea-ice, which is highly reflective, leads to greater solar heating of the surface, mainly in summer, and further warming (a positive "temperature albedo" feedback, see Section 3.3.3). Second,

Month

Figure 5.3: Time-latitude diagram of the zonally averaged increase in surface temperature due to doubling CO2 in the GISS model (Hansen et al, 1984; from Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1987). Warming > 4°C stippled.

the warming leads to thinner sea ice allowing a greater flux of heat through the ice from the ocean in winter, enhancing the warming of the surface (Manabe and Stouffer, 1980). Third, there is a further temperature albedo feedback over the northern extra-tropical continents in spring due to the reduced extent and earlier melting of highly reflective snow-cover. Fourth, the warming is confined to near the surface. Thus the increase in outgoing long-wave radiation (at the top of the atmosphere) for each degree of warming is small relative to lower latitudes, where the warming is mixed throughout the troposphere. As a result, a larger warming is required in high latitudes to counterbalance the increase in downward radiation due to the increase in greenhouse gases. Finally, there is increased latent-heat release in high latitudes because of the stronger flux of moisture from the tropics (see Section 3).

In the more recent high resolution simulations (Table 3.2a, entries 20 - 22), the warming over North America in winter is about 4°C, rising to 8°C in the northeast of.the continent (for example, Figure 5.4 a, b, c - over page). Similarly, over Europe and northern Asia, the warming is of order 4°C, with some areas of much larger warming as for example in eastern Siberia.

The comparatively large warming over sea-ice in autumn and early winter, and over the northern continents in spring, is physically plausible. Much of the variation in these features from model to model can be attributed to

(c) DJF 2 X CO2 -1 X CO2 SURFACE AIR TEMPERATURE: UKHI

Figure 5.4: Change in surface air temperature (ten year means) due to doubling CC>2’ f°r months December-January-February, as simulated by three high resolution models: (a) CCC: Canadian Climate Centre (Boer, pers. comm., 1989), (b) GFHI: Geophysical Fluids Dynamics Laboratory (Manabe and Wetherald, pers. comm., 1990), and (c) UKHI: United Kingdom Meteorological Office (Mitchell and Senior, pers. comm., 1990). Contours every 2°C, light stippling where the warming exceeds 4°C, dashed shading where the warming exceeds 8°C. Also shown in the colour section.

(d) JJA 2 X C02 -1 X C02 SURFACE AIR TEMPERATURE: CCC

(e) JJA 2 X CO2 -1 X CO2 SURFACE AIR TEMPERATURE: GFHI

differences in the sea-ice extents and snow cover in the simulation of present climate.

3.	The warming is smaller than the global mean over seaice in the Arctic in summer (Figure 5.4 d, e,f) and around Antarctica in the corresponding season (Figure 5.4 a. c): In summer the temperature of the surface of permanent seaice reaches melting point in both lxC02 (present day) and 2xCC>2 simulations (Figure 5.3). Even in models where sea-ice disappears in summer in the 2xCC>2 simulation, the large heat capacity of the oceanic mixed layer inhibits further warming above 0°C during the few months when it is ice free. Thus, the winter and annual average warmings are largest in high latitudes, but the summer warming is smaller than the annual average warming.

4.	In all models, the tropical warming is both smaller than the global mean and varies little with season being typically 2 to 3 °C (for example. Figures 5.3, 5.4):

The saturation vapour pressure of water increases non-linearly with temperature, so that at higher temperature, proportionally more of the increase in radiative heating of the surface is used to increase evaporation rather than to raise surface temperature. As a result, the surface warming is reduced relative to the global mean because of enhanced evaporative cooling. The enhanced evaporation is associated with increased tropical precipitation (see Section

5.2.2.2)	. Thus the warming of the upper troposphere in the tropics is greater than the global mean due to increased latent-heat release (Figure 5.2). Note that the magnitude of the warming in the tropics in those models with a similar global mean warming varies by a factor of almost 2 (Figure

5.2)	. The reasons for this are probably differences in the treatment of convection (Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1987; Cunnington and Mitchell. 1990) (the vertical transfer of heat and moisture on scales smaller than the model grid), in the choice of cloud radiative parameters (Cess and Potter, 1988) and the distribution of model layers in the vertical (Wetherald and Manabe. 1988). Some of these factors have been discussed further in Section 3.

5.	In most models, the warming over northern mid-latitude continents in summer is greater than the global mean (for example, Figure 5.4 d. c. f):

Where the land surface becomes sufficiently dry to restrict evaporation, further drying reduces evaporation and hence evaporative cooling, leading to further warming of the surface (Figure 5.5). The reduction in evaporation may also produce a reduction in low cloud (for example, Manabe and Wetherald, 1987), further enhancing the surface warming (Figure 5.5). In one model. (Washington and Meehl, 1984; Meehl and Washington, 1989) the land surface becomes generally wetter in these latitudes in summer, reducing the warming. This is probably due to the

1

MORE

WARMING

4

LESS LOW CLOUD

Figure 5.5: Schematic representation of soil moisture temperature feedback through changes in evaporation and low cloud.

land surface being excessively dry in the control simulation (see Section 5.2.2.3).

The summer warming in the more recent simulations (Table 3.2a, entries 20-22) is typically 4 to 5°C over the St. Lawrence-Great Lakes region and 5 to 6°C over central Asia (for example. Figure 5.4 d, e, f). Many of the intermodel differences in the simulated warming over the summer continents can be attributed to differences in the simulated changes in soil moisture and cloud.

5.2.2.2	Precipitation changes

1.	All models produce enhanced precipitation in high latitudes and the tropics throughout the year, and in midlatitudes in winter (see for example. Figure 5.6 ):

All models simulate a substantially moister atmosphere (increased specific humidity). Precipitation occurs in regions of lower level convergence, including the midlatitude storm tracks and the inter-tropical convergence zone (ITCZ), where moist inflowing air is forced to ascend, cool and precipitate to remove the resulting supersaturation. The increases in atmospheric moisture will lead to a greater flux of moisture into these regions and hence increased precipitation provided there are no large compensational changes in circulation. The high resolution models (Table 3.2a, entries 20-22) give an increase of 10 to 20% in precipitation averaged over land between 35 and 55°N.

(a) DJF 2 X CO2 - 1 X CO2 PRECIPITATION: CCC

2.	Changes in the dry subtropics are generally small and with both increases and decreases:

The interannual variability of precipitation is large relative to its mean value in these regions, so many of the changes indicated by the models cannot be demonstrated to be statistically significant. Note that even small changes of precipitation in arid regions can have substantial impacts.

3.	There are considerable discrepancies regarding changes in precipitation on sub-continental scales, especially in the tropics although most models simulate an enhancement of the precipitation associated with a strengthening of the Southwest Asian monsoon (Table 3.2a, entries 3, 7, 8, 13, 15-22, Figure 5.6):

The inter-model agreement concerning changes in precipitation is less than in the case of temperature changes for two reasons. First, precipitation is changed ndirectly by a wider variety of different processes, many of them not resolved on the model's grid, and so is inherently more difficult to model, whereas the warming is primarily a direct response to increased radiative heating. Second, the changes in precipitation are relatively small compared with the natural variations and so are more difficult to detect in the short sampling period available.

In many of the models, summer rainfall decreases slightly over much of the northern mid-latitude continents and there is a tendency for the tropical maximum of the precipitation to shift further into the summer hemisphere. In other models, the tropical rain belt tends to shift into the winter hemisphere (Table 3.2a, entries 11, 12) or southwards throughout the year (Table 3.2a, entry 6). In some models, enhancement of the Asian monsoon appears to be associated with strong positive cloud feedback whereby decreases in cloud cover over Eurasia in summer enhance the solar heating of the surface (Wilson and Mitchell 1987a). This increases the land-sea temperature contrast which drives the summer monsoon.

Some of the precipitation over mid-latitude continents in summer originates from local evaporation (Mintz, 1984) so the simulated changes in precipitation are likely to be sensitive to the wetness of the surface and the formulation of evapotranspiration. Changes in soil moisture are considered in more detail in the following sub-section.

5.2.2.3	Soil moisture changes.

In all simulations with enhanced CO2, both evaporation and precipitation increase. In regions where precipitation increases, increases in evaporation may be even greater. Current models represent the availability of water in the upper soil layers by a soil moisture variable, which is augmented by precipitation and snow melt, and depleted by evaporation and runoff. The representations of surface hydrology in models used so far in 2xCO2 experiments are highly simplified, though some models make allowance for

the type of soil and/or vegetation in a simple manner (Table 3.2a, entries 11, 12, 20). Note that none of the models considered allow for the direct effect of CO2 on vegetation. Of particular importance is the expected increase in water efficiency (Section 10) which, in the absence of other changes, would reduce evapotranspiration from the surface.

The main findings from equilibrium simulations are:

1.	All models simulate a general increase in the soil moisture of the northern high-latitude continents in winter (Figure 5.7, 5.8 a, b, c):

This increase is due to some or all of the following factors:-enhanced winter precipitation, more precipitation falling as rain rather than snow, more snowmelt and the relatively low rate of increase of potential evaporation with temperature found at lower winter temperatures. Note only a few models (Table 3.2a, entries 11, 12, 16, 20) allow in any way for the effects of groundwater becoming frozen.

2.	Most models produce an enhanced large-scale drying of the Earth's surface in northern mid-latitude during northern summer (Figure 5.7, 5.8 d, e,f):

Although there is good agreement among the most recent simulations in this respect, confidence in the reliability of the simulated changes is low in view of the simplified representation of the land surface. In the three high resolution models, the reduction in soil moisture averaged over 35 to 55°N ranges from 17 to 23%. The reasons for this drying are discussed in more detail below. In three of the simulations that do not produce such a drying (Table 3.2a; entries 6, 7, 16), the soil in the control simulation is excessively dry. In the other two (Table 3.2a, entries 11, 12), it has been argued that the simulated changes are equivalent to increased frequency of drought in these latitudes (Rind et al., 1989a).

Figure 5.7: Time-latitude diagram of changes in soil moisture due to doubling CO2, Contours every cm, areas of decrease stippled. (Manabe and Wetherald, 1987).

(a) DJF 2 X CO2 -1 X C02 SOIL MOISTURE: CCC

(b) DJF 2 X CO2 -1 X CO2 SOIL MOISTURE: GFHI

Figure 5.8: Change in soil moisture (smoothed 10-year means) due to doubling CO2, for months December-January-February, as simulated by three high resolution models: (a) CCC, (b) GFHI, and (c) UKEH. Note that (a) has a geographically variable soil capacity whereas the other two models have the same capacity everywhere. Contours at± 0, 1, 2, 5 cm, areas of decrease stippled. Also shown in the colour section.

(d) JJA 2 X CO2 -1 X C02 SOIL MOISTURE: CCC

(e) JJA 2 X CO2 -1 X CO2 SOIL MOISTURE: GFHI

(f) JJA 2 X CO2 -1 X CO2 SOIL MOISTURE: UKHI

Figure 5.8 continued: Change in soil moisture (smoothed 10-year means) due to doubling CO2> for months June-July-August, as simulated by three high resolution models: (d) CCC, (e) GFHI, and (f) UKHI. Note that (d) has a geographically variable soil capacity whereas the other two models have the same capacity everywhere. Contours at ± 0, 1, 2, 5 cm, areas of decrease stippled. Also shown in the colour section.

Figure 5.9: Changes in area means due to doubling CO2 averaged over land between 35 to 55°N. (a) Water budget (mm day1) (b) Heat budget (Wm_2) (c) Soil moisture (lxCC>2 and 2xCC>2) (from the study by Manabe and Wetherald, 1987).

Since drying of the northern mid-latitude continents in summer could have significant impacts, these changes warrant a close examination of the physical processes responsible, and the fidelity of their ^presentation in

models needs to be considered carefully. Hence the waler and energy budgets in this region have been analysed in some detail. In the control simulation, all models produce a maximum in soil moisture in winter and spring, and a rapid drying to a minimum in summer (Figure 5.9c). With doubled CO2, enhanced winter precipitation (and snow melt) (Figure 5.9a) produce higher soil moisture levels into early spring (Figure 5.9c). In the warmer climate, snow melt and the summer drying begin earlier, reducing the soil moisture levels in summer relative to the present climate (Figures 5.8d, e, f, 5.9c). The drying in the 2xCC>2 simulation is also more rapid due to the higher temperatures and in some regions is reinforced by reduced precipitation. Reductions in surface moisture may lead to a drying of the boundary layer, reduced low cloud and hence further warming and drying of the surface (Manabe and Wetherald, 1987) (see also Figure 5.5).

In most models, the soil over much of mid-latitudes (35 to 55°N) is close to saturation in spring in both the lxCCb and 2xCC>2 simulations, so that on enhancing CCb, the summer drying starts earlier but from the same level (for example, Figure 5.10a). In a minority of models (Meehl and Washington, 1988,1989; Mitchell and Warrilow. 1987) the soil in the lxCC>2 formulation is not close to saturation, and the enhanced winter precipitation in 2xCC>2 simulation is stored in the soil. Hence, although the summer drying in the 2xCC>2 experiments starts earlier, it starts from a higher level than in the control simulation, and may not become drier before next winter season (Figure 5.10b). Even in these models, the surface becomes drier in the southern mid-latitudes in the 2xCC>2 simulations.

From the experiments carried out to date, the following factors appear to contribute to the simulated summer drying in mid-latitudes.

i) The soil is close to saturation in late winter (spring in higher latitudes) in the control simulation, so that increased precipitation in the anomaly simulation is run off and is not stored in the soil.

ii) The greater the seasonal variation of soil moisture in the control simulation, the greater the change due to an earlier start to the drying season (for example Figure 5.9c). Of course, if the soil moisture content in the simulation of present climate is very small in summer, it cannot decrease much. A comparison of model and field data over the Soviet Union (Vinnikov and Yeserkepova, 1989) indicates that the simulated soil moisture levels in some models arc much too low in summer. The simulated reduction in soil moisture due to doubling CO2 in such models would then be less than if higher, more realistic levels of soil moisture were present in the contiol simulation.

Month

Figure 5.10: Seasonal cycle of soil moisture for normal and doubled CO2 concentrations, averaged over land, 45-60°N

(a) With standard treatment of runoff (b) With snowmelt run olf over frozen ground (from Mitchell and Warrilow 1987)

111) In higher latitudes, snow melts earlier Hence accurate simulation of snow cover is important

iv)	The changes in soil moisture can be amplified by feedbacks involving changes in cloud

v)	Enhanced summer drying in mid-latitudes may occur even in models which produce enhanced precipitation Of course, the drying is more pronounced in those models (and regions) in which precipitation is reduced tn summer

The simulated changes of soil moisture in the tropics vary iiom model to model, being more directly related to changes in precipitation

5 2 2 4 Sea ice changes

In simulations with enhanced CO2, both the extent and thickness of sea ice are significantly reduced In some summer simulations sea ice is completely removed in the Arctic (Wilson and Mitchell, 1987a Boer, 1989, personal communication) and around Antarctica (Wilson and Mitchell 1987a) In other models there aie large reductions

in the extent of sea ice but some cover lemains in the Arctic and aiound Antarctica in summer (Noda and Tokioka, 1989 Meehl and Washington, 1989) Finally in some models (Wcthcrald 1989, peis comm) the extent of sea-ice change is less, but the thickness is reduced bv up to a factor of two

The factors contributing to the differences between models include diffcicnccs in the sea-ice extent and depth in the control simulation (Spelman and Manabe, 1984), differences in the treatment of sea-ice albedo (for example, Washington and Meehl, 1986), and the inclusion of corrective hcat-llux undci sea ice in some models (for example Manabe and Wethciald, 1989, personal communication, Boer, 1989 personal communication) and not others

On the basis of cuncnt simulations, it is not possible to make reliable quantitative estimates ol the changes in the sea ice extent and depth It should be noted that the models considered here neglect ice dynamics, leads, salinity effects, and changes in ocean circulation

5 2 2 5 Changes in mean sea lex el piessme

Except in areas close to the equator, sea-level pressure (SLP) changes give an indication of changes in the low-level circulation, including the strength and intensity of the mean suiiacc winds The changes in SLP have been assessed using the limited number of results available (Table 3 2a, entries 7, 13, 15, 20-22), though in most cases, information on the statistical significance of the changes was not provided

/ Tin ougliout the seen theie is a weakening of the ninth south piessme giadient m the southern hemisphei e exti ati opus (foi example Figme 5 11 oxei page) implying a weakening of the mid latitude westeihes

Both the subtropical anticyclones and the Antarctic cncumpolai low pressure trough diminish in intensity (Figure 5 11 over page) This is presumably due to the relatively strong warming over sea-ice around Antarctica reducing the equator-to-pole temperature gradient (for example, Figure 5 2) Note that at higher levels of the troposphere, the equator-to-pole temperature gradient is increased (for example, Figure 5 2) and may be sufficient to produce stronger westerly How at upper levels (Mitchell and Wilson, 1987a), and that coupled models do not produce a large warming around Antarctica (see Section 6)

2 In Decembei Januaiy and Febiuaiy most models pioduce highei piessme off Newfoundland, consistent with an eastwaid shift of the Iceland low and a general die 1 ease osei eastern Sibeiia appcuently due to a weakening of the Sibei tan antic v< lone (Figm e 5 Ila)

? In lune lids and August SLP deci eases ox ei Euiasia intensifying the monsoon low and theie aie mcieases osei

(a) DJF 2 X CO2 -1 X CO2 MEAN SEA LEVEL PRESSURE: CCC

(b) JJA 2 X CO2 - 1 X C02 MEAN SEA LEVEL PRESSURE: COG

Figure 5.11: Changes in mean sea level pressure due lo doubling CO2 as simulated by a Canadian Climate Centre model (Boer, private communication, 1989). Contours every 1 mb, areas of decrease are stippled, (a) December, January and February, (b) June, July and August

India, implying a northward shift of the monsoon trough at those longitudes (Figure 5.11b ). There is also a weakening of the Azores anticyclone:

Although these features are common to most of the models considered, there are also large differences in the location of individual features from model to model. Hence changes in low level circulation at a particular location are uncertain. The interannual variability of SEP is large, particularly in the extra-tropics in winter. This, as well as differences in model formulation, contributes to intermodel differences.

52.2.6	Deep ocean circulation changes.

There have been few equilibrium CO2 experiments using atmospheric models coupled to a full dynamical model of the ocean, and most so far (Spelman and Manabe, 1984;

Manabc and Bryan, 1985) have assumed a simplified geometry and neglected the seasonal variation of insolation. Two main features have emerged.

1.	The large warming of the ocean in high latitudes is propagated downwards to the ocean floor, where it spreads to all latitudes. The warming of the deep oceans is consistent with palaeo-oceanographic data for a warmer climate (the Cretaceous, about 70 million years ago).

2.	There is a weakening of the mean meridional oceanic circulation of the Atlantic on doubling CO2 from present to higher levels (Manabe et al., 1990). This is also seen in the transient response experiments (Section 6).

5.3	Equilibrium Changes in Variability due to Doubling CO2

Changes in the variability and frequency of extreme events may have more impact than changes in mean climate. Changes in the frequency of extreme events may occur in a number of ways. For example, the shape of the frequency distribution may not be altered, but the mean may change, leading to a sharp increase in the frequency of extreme events at one end of the frequency distribution, and a decrease at the other end (Mearns et al., 1984,1990; Parry and Carter, 1985; Wigley, 1985; Pittock, 1989) (Figure 5.12a). Thus the general warming due to increases in greenhouse gases will undoubtedly lead to more frequent "hot" days and fewer "cold" days. Conversely, the mean may be unchanged, but the shape of the frequency distribution may alter. For example, the standard deviation (spread) of the frequency distribution may increase producing more extreme events at both ends of the distribution (Figure 5.12b). Of course, the mean and the spread of the frequency distribution may change simultaneously.

In the first example, the changes in the frequency of extreme events can be calculated by simply shifting the currently observed (or simulated control) frequency distribution by the mean change (Figure 5.12a). Here, the second type of change is considered in more detail. The standard deviation of the frequency distribution is used as a measure of variability, and both the standard deviation of daily values about the monthly mean and the standard deviation of the interannual variation of monthly means arc considered, as appropriate. For day-to-day variability, results from only two models were available (Table 3.2a, entries 20, 22), whereas for interannual variability, results

from five models were used (Table 3.2a, entries 7, 11, 13, 15, 20).

Several factors must be borne in mind when deriving changes in standard deviations from numerical simulations. First, a much longer simulation is required to establish that changes in standard deviations, as opposed to changes in means, are statistically significant. Most studies to date use periods of 15 years or less, which is barely sufficient to establish that the simulated changes in standard deviation are unlikely to have occurred by chance. Second, although the models exhibit a measure of agreement on Lhe larger scales, there is much less agreement on the regional scale, especially in the case of precipitation. Hence, only the changes in standard deviations on the larger scales will be considered. Third, information on changes in variability is not as readily available as information on changes in means. Thus the conclusions below are based on a much smaller number of simulations than is generally the case in Section 5.2. Finally, the coupled atmosphere mixed layer models used to derive the results in this section do not reproduce the El Nino - Southern Oscillation phenomena which are the main source of interannual variability in the tropics (Section 7.9.1).

5.3.1	Temperature

5.3.1.1	Day-to-day variability

Results from only two models were available globally. There are reductions in the standard deviation over and around the winter sea-ice margins - notably over Hudson Bay, the Norwegian Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk in January and around Antarctica in July. The decrease in these regions may be attributed to the reduction in the northsouth temperature gradient (Figure 5.4), and to a reduction

Figure 5.12: Schematic changes in frequency distributions. The solid area marks the 5% extremes of a normal distribution. The shaded area represents an increase in the number of extreme events outside the unperturbed 5% limits, (a) Increase in mean only. Note the large increase in the number of extreme events to the right of the original distribution, (b) No change in mean but a 50% increase in standard deviation. Note the increase in extreme events on both sides of the original distribution.

in the fiequency or intensity of atmospheric disturbances (sec Section 5 3 3) There are also reductions over much of the northern hemisphere continents in January, although both models produce increases over parts of Canada and Siberia A third study (Rind et al , 1989b) reports decreases over the United States though generally they are not statistically significant

5 3 12 Intel annual \ai lability

Apart from a general reduction in the vicinity of the winter sea-ice margins, no meaningful patterns of change could be distinguished (Five models were considered. Table 3 2a, entries 7, 11, 13, 15, 20)

5 3 13 Dim nal i ange of tempei atm e

There is no compelling evidence for a general reduction in the amplitude of the diurnal cycle

The increases in CCb and other greenhouse gases inciease the downward longwave flux at the surface (Section 2) Both the upward flux ol longwave radiation and evaporative cooling increase non linearly with surface temperatuie One would expect the increased downward radiation to produce a larger warming at night (when the surface temperature and hence the iate of increase of radiative and evaporative cooling with increase in temperature is smaller) than during the day and hence a reduction in diurnal range

Only a few models contain a diurnal cycle (see Table 3 2a) Boer (personal communication) reports a small reduction (0 28°C) in the globally averaged diurnal lange of temperature (Table 3 2a, entry 20) In another study (Rind et al , 1989b) the range usually decreased over the United States, especially in summei However Cao (personal communication) found that increases in the diurnal iange of temperature were evident over much of the noithein mid-latitude continents especially in spring and autumn (Table 3 2a, entiy 15) although the global annual mean was reduced by 0 17°C The amplitude of the diurnal cycle may also be reduced by mcieases in cloud cover oi ground wetness, or altered by changes in the latitude of the snowline As these quantities (and changes in these quantities) vary greatly from model to model a reduction in the diurnal cycle seems far from certain

5.3.2	Precipitation

Precipitation exhibits much more temporal and spatial variability than temperature As a result, the simulation of the mean (and variability) of precipitation for present day climate is less reliable than foi temperatuie, particularly in low icsolution models, and it is only possible to make weak statements concerning changes in vai lability

1 Theie is some indication that \ (inability (mteiannual standaid deMation) me leases wheie mean pi capitation

153 mcieases and sice-sei sa (Wilson and Mitchell 1987b Rmd et al 1989b), though this is not alway s the case For example, in one study (Rmd et al , 1989b) this tendency in interannual variability was found at 60-70% ol the grid-points considered In another study (Wilson and Mitchell, 1987b) the summer rainfall over southern Europe decreased and the maximum number of consecutive days without rainfall increased substantially

2 Theie is a consistent ma ease m the fiequcncy of comectise (sub gild-scale) pi ec ipitation usually at the expense of pi capitation fiom the leugei scale (icsobed) seitical motions (Noda and Tokioka 1989 Hansen et al 1989 Mitchell pets comm)

In one study (Noda and Tokioka, 1989) the area oi precipitation over the globe decreased even though global mean precipitation increased There is a tendency for convective motions to penetrate higher (Mitchell and Ingram, 1989, Wetherald and Manabe, 1988) and perhaps over greater depth (Hansen et al , 1989) in a warmer climate These changes imply an increase in the more intense local ram storms and hence in run olf, at the expense of the gentler but more persistent rainfall events associated with larger scale disturbances Note that not all models include the diurnal cycle which has a strong modulating influence on convection

The tendency for local convective instability to mciease is likely to be independent of the particular model used as in a wanner climate, the radiative cooling of the atmosphere and the radiative heating of the surface both increase (Mitchell et al , 1987) These changes must be balanced by the enhanced vertical transport of heat from the surface Furthermore, given the non-linear increase in potential evaporation with increase in temperature the mciease in vertical heat tiansport is more likely to be achieved through latent heat rathei than by sensible heat, and hence accompanied by a marked inciease in convective rainfall

5.3.3	Winds and Disturbances

Current climate models particularly those at lower resolution have limited success in simulating storm tracks and low frequency variability, and do not resolve smaller scale disturbances such as hurricanes explicitly (Sections 4 2 4, 4 6) Hence results from current models at best only give an indication of the likely changes in winds and disturbances

/ Theie is some indication of a geneial i eduction m day to day and mtei annual \ai lability in the nud-latitudc stmm tiacks in ysmtei though the patterns of change \cuy fiom model to model

Here, the standard deviation of variations in mean sea-level picssure (SLP) has been used as an indication of the

liequency and intensity of disturbances A icduction in mid-latitude synoptic variability might be expected as a lesult of the ieduction in the equator to-pole tempeiatuie gradient at low levels (ioi example Figure 5 2) Results on changes in day-to-day variability weie available irom only two models There was a geneial reduction in the standard deviation in mid-latitudes in winter though the patterns ol change differed considerably By applying a time filtei to the daily vanances of 500mb height one can pick out the mid latitude storm tracks (Blackmon 1975) In wmtei Siegmund (1990) found a reduction in the intensity of the liltered vanances of 5()()mb height in mid latitudes and an incieasc in high latitudes (Table 3 2a entiy 15) In anothei study (Bates and Meehl 1986 Table 3 2a entiy 6) a sinnlai reduction in the filtered vanance ol 5()()mb heights was i eported All these changes indicate a deci ease in the intensity oi frequency (oi both) of chstuibances lesolved on the model gud (typically greatei than about 1 000 km) but do not allow one to conclude the same foi smallei scale synoptic distuibances One study (Bates and Meehl 1986) icports a reduction in blocking (deiincd as aieas of high piessuic anomaly which persist Ioi moic than seven days) in the southern hemisphere, and changes in the positions but not the intensity of blocking in the Noithcin Hcmispheie though no information was piovided on the statistical significance of the results

In the five models consideied thcic was a general icduction in the standaid deviation of mteiannual vanations in monthly mean SLP Howevei the patterns varied considciably from model to model so no othei meaningful conclusions could be drawn

2 Thue is some estelenee fiom model simulations and empuieal eonsideiations that the fiee/uenes pel seen intensity and aiea of oeiuiience of tiopieal distm bailees mas me i ease thous>h it is not set compclhnt’

It has been observed that tiopieal stoims (huiricanes typhoons or cyclones) form only wheic the sea surface tempeiatures (SSTs) are 27°C or gieatei This might lead one to expect a more widespiead occuircnce of tropical stoims in a warmer climate A recent theoietical model of tiopieal stoims suggests that the maximum possible intensity would increase, with an enhancement of destructive powei (as measured by the square oi the wind speed) of 40% for an increase of 3°C in SST (Emanuel 1987) Howevei, Emanuel (1987) did note that very few tiopieal storms in the present climate actually attained the maximum intensity predicted by his analysis In a complementary study, Meirill (1988) discussed the environmental influences on humcane intensification In agieement with Fmanuel Mcnill concluded that the maximum intensity of a tiopieal stoim is bounded above by a monotonically incieasing function oi sea surface tempeiature (SST) By compositing intensifying vcisus

non intensifying systems ovei a six year penod foi the North Atlantic Mei rill was able to identify a number of envnonmental factois which could inhibit the further deepening of a tropical storm, even if the SSTs are favouiable The non intensifying composite storms displayed stionger vertical wind shears and uni directional flow over and neai the storm centre than intensifying stoims Giay (1979) identified the need for weak vertical wind-sheai ovei and near the storm centre and enhanced low-level cyclonic vorticity and mid-tropospheric humidity as factors favouring intensification of a tropical cyclone There is no guaiantee that criteria such as the lower bound of SST of 27 C would iemain constant with changes in climate Theie is little agieement in the simulated changes in tiopieal cnculation due to doubling CO? in cuirent climate models (as shown by the differing patteins of changes in tropical piecipitation) Furtheimore, the models consideied in this section ignore changes in ocean cnculation which form pait of the El Nino phenomenon and lead to the associated anomalies in SST and atmospheuc cnculation which have a profound influence on the present distnbution and liequency of tropical stoims

High lesolution atmospheuc models used for weather foiecasting show considciablc success at predicting the development and tiack ol tiopieal cyclones (Dell Osso and Bengtsson 1985 Knshnamuiti et al , 1989, Morris 1989) although the honzontal lesolution used (~10()km) is inadequate to lesolve their detailed structure Krishnamurti et al (1989) iound that the quality of the foiecasts decieased as horizontal lesolution was decreased but even so the simulated maximum wind intensity decreased little until much coaiser (above 400 km) lesolution was reached At the lowei lesolution used in climate studies (250 km or gieatei) one can choose objective criteria (foi example, a waim coie and low level vorticity and surface piessure depicssion gieatei than specified limits) to select appropriate cyclones and compare their seasonal and geogiaphical distnbutions with those of observed tropical stoims In both iespects the simulated storms resemble those obseived ovei most oceans (Manabc et al 1970, Bengtsson et al 1985 Bioccoli and Manabe 1990 (Table 3 2a entiy 21) ) Thus although global models cannot iesolvc huiricanes explicitly they give a surprisingly good indication of the regions of potential hurricane formation In contiast to empirical methods the criteria chosen are not obviously dependent on the present climate

Using models with prescribed cloudiness, Broccoli and Manabe (1990) found an incicase of 20% in the number of storm days (a combined measure of the number and duiation of storms) on doubling CCb This is attributed to enhanced evaporation leading to increased moisture conveigence and latent heat release which is converted to locally transient kinetic energy (stronger winds) In

contrast, in an experiment in which cloudiness was allowed to change, the number of storm days dccieased by 10 to 15% even though the increase in evaporation was even greater in this experiment The increases in local energy generation and conversion were smaller, and the associated winds weakened slightly The reason for this discrepancy has not been found, nor has the role of cloud feedback in these results been identified

A preliminary experiment with a model which resolves hurricanes (Yamasaki, personal communication) showed an increase in the number, and a decrease in the intensity of tropical disturbances when sea surface temperatures were increased, but the simulation was very short

In summary, the maximum intensity of tropical storms may increase, but the distribution and frequency of occurrence will depend on the detailed changes in aspects of circulation in the tropics which are probably not yet adequately simulated by climate models

5.4	Regional Changes - Estimates for 2030 (assuming IPCC "Business-as-Usuai" Scenario)

5.4.1	Introduction

In order to assess the impacts of future changes in climate, one needs to know the changes and rates of change in climate on a regional scale (i e , areas of order 1000 km square or so) Results from current equilibrium experiments often differ regarding regional variations in the changes Furthermore, few time-dependent simulations have been carried out (Section 6), none correspond exactly to the IPCC Scenarios and all use low horizontal resolution Neveitheless, one of the briefs of Woiking Group I was to provide estimates of changes in 5 selected regions

In order to provide these regional estimates it has been necessary to make certain assumptions and appioximations (Section 5 4 3)

The mam conclusions of this section (see Table 5 1 -next page) are

1	The regional changes in temperature may vary substantially from the global mean, and the magnitudes of regional changes in precipitation and soil moisture are typically 10 to 20% at 2030 under the IPCC "Business-as-Usual Scenario

2	Although there is still substantial disagreement in some regions between the models considered, the agreement is better than in earlier studies (e g , Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1987)

5.4.2	Limitations Of Simulated Regional Changes

Although there is agreement between models on the qualitative nature of the large-scale changes in tempeiatuie and to a lesser extent precipitation, theie is much less agreement when one considers variations in the changes on

a legional (sub continental) scale 1 e areas oi ordci 1 000 000 km2 Foi example it is likely that increases in greenhouse gases will mciease piecipilation neai 60 degrees of latitude north, but theie is little agreement between models on the variation of the incieases with longitude The horizontal resolution of most models used until now (typically 250-700km) is inadequate to pioduce an accurate iepresentation of many of the regional fcatuies of climate especially precipitation, which is stiongly influenced by topography The parameterization of pio-cesses not explicitly resolvable on the model grid also leads to errors at regional scales The models in Table 3 2a do not allow for changes or mterannual vanations in oceanic heat transport

The nature of inter-model discrepancies in these studies is illustrated by considering the changes averaged ovei several regions of about 4,000 000 km2 The legions aie chosen so as to represent a range oi climates Diffeient models perform well in different regions Inconsistencies in the changes produced by different models may be iesolvcd to some extent by selecting those models giving the moie realistic simulations of present climate Such critical evaluations at regional level will best be done by the potential users and revised as improved model simulations become available Confidence in any one prediction ol spatial variations in changes at a regional scale must presently be regarded as low

An estimate of the changes in tcmpeiature, piccipitation and soil moisture aveiaged over the 5 legions selected by IPCC is given in Section 5 4 4 The Jesuits aie based on the high resolution studies (Table 3 2a, entries 20-22) since in general these produce a better simulation of present day climate (see Section 4) Results horn five low iesolution models (Grotch 1988, 1989, pcisonal communication) (Table 3 2a. entnes 3, 7 11 13 15) were also considered There may be considerable variations within the legions and in the changes produced by the different models within the regions

5.4.3	Assumptions Made In Deriving Estimates For 2030 The following assumptions have been made

i)	The concentrations of greenhouse gases increase as in the IPCC "Business-as-Usual" Scenario. This assumes only modest incieases in efficiency and gives an effective doubling of CO2 by about 2020 and an effective quadrupling by about 2080 Reference will also be made to IPCC Scenano B which assumes huge efficiency increases and sub stantial emission controls which dela> an effective doubling of CO2 to about 2040

11) The "best guess" of the magnitude of the global mean equilibrium increase in surface temperature due to doubling CO2 (the climate sensitmtv) is

Table 5.1 Estimates of < lianges in ai eal means of suifac e an tempeiatm e and pi ei ipitation os ei selec ted / egions, fi om pi e-mdusti ml times to 2010 assuming the IPCC "Busmess-as Usual" Scenaiio These aie based on thiee high lesolution equtlibi mm studies m luc h ai e c onsidei ed to gn e the most i ehable i egional pattei ns but si ahm> the simulated values to ioiiespond to a global mean uaimini’ of 1 8 °C the maimint’ at 2030 assuming the IPCC "best guess" sensitn itv of 2 5 °C and allowing foi the theimal meitia of the oceans The lange of values ai isesfiom the use of thiee diffeient models Foi a sensitivity of 1 5 °C, the values below should be ieduced by 30%, foi a sensitivity of 4 5 °C they should be tncieased by 50% Confidence in these estimates is low, pai ticulai lv foi piecipitation and soil moistuie Note that theie aie consideiable vaiiations in the changes within some of these legions

M

REGION	O D E  L	TEMPERATURE  (°C)		PRECIPITATION  (% change)		SOIL MOISTURE  (% change)	
		DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA	DJF	JJA
1 Central North America	1	4	2	0	-5	-10	-15
(35-50°N,	2	2	2	15	-5	15	-15
80-105°W)	3	4	3	10	-10	-10	-20
2 South East  Asia	1	1	1	-5	5	0	5
(5-30°N,	2	2	1	0	10	-5	10
70 105°E)	3	2	2	15	15	0	5
3 Sahel	1	2	2	-10	5	0	-5
(10-20’N,	2	2	1	-5	5	5	0
20W-40°E)	3	1	2	0	0	10	-10
4 Southern Europe	1	2	2	5	-15	0	-15
(35-5O°N,	2	2	2	10	-5	5	-15
10W-45“E)	3	2	3	0	-15	-5	-25
5 Australia	1	1	2	15	0	45	5
(12-45”S,	2	2	2	5	0	-5	-10
110-155’E)	3	2	2	10	0	5	0

The numbers 1, 2 and 3 in the third column correspond to the models under entries 20, 21 and 22 respectively in Table 3 2a

2.5°C. This estimate is based on evidence from both models and obseivations (Section 5 2 1)

in) The most reliable estimate of the regional patterns of change is given by the high resolution models. (Table 3 2a, entries 20-22) These models in general produce a better simulation ol present climate than those run at lower resolution (Section 5 4 1) and give results which are moic consistent than those horn earlier low resolution studies (see foi example, Schlesinger and Mitchell 1987 and Section 5 4 4) Note that although othei models give a mean warming which is closei to the best guess (lor

example, Table 3 2a, entries 17-19) they have a coarser resolution which degrades their simulation of regional climate Hence the pattei ns of change have been derived from the high resolution models, even though they give a warming which is larger than the ' best guess" of 2 5°C

iv)	The patterns of equilibrium and transient climate change are similar. As stated in Section 5 4 1, the few time dependent simulations that have been run do not use the IPCC Emission Scenarios and so cannot be used directly and have been run at low hori/onlal lesolution degrading their capability to

simulate regional changes Recent results horn the coupled ocean-atmosphere models (Section 6) indicate that the reduction oi the warming due to oceanic thermal inertia is paiticulaily pronounced in the circumpolar ocean ot the southern ocean and the northern North Atlantic where deep vertical mixing of water occurs Elsewhere, the reduction is much smaller and the time-dependent response is similar to the equilibrium response (Section 6, Figure 6 5c) The distribution of the changes in the hydrological cycle was also similar to that at equilibrium, but reduced in magnitude

v)	The regional changes in temperature, precipitation and soil moisture are proportional to the global mean changes in surface temperatures. This will be approximately valid except possibly in regions where the changes arc associated with a shift in the position of steep gradients, for example whcic the snowline retreats, or on the edge ol a rainbclt which is displaced In general, this assumption is likely to be less valid for precipitation and soil moisture than foi temperature In the cxpenment described in detail in Section 6 (Stoulicr et al, 1989). the mean temperature icsponsc north ol 30°S is about 15% higher than the global mean response this enhancement is omitted in the regional estimates given below.

vi)	The changes in global mean temperature can be derived from a simple diffusion-upwelling box model. For the Business-as-Usual Scenario, this gives a warming of 1 3 to 2 6°C from pre-industrial times to present, with a "best guess" of 1 8°C (Section 6.6.2) For Scenario B, these estimates should be reduced by about 15%

Although it is hard to justify some of these assumptions on riguorous scientific grounds, the errors involved are substantially smallei than the uncertainties arising Irom the threefold range ol climate sensitivity On the basis oi the above assumptions, the estimates ol regional change have been obtained by scaling the results from the high resolution models by a lactor ol 1 8/ATs where ATs is the climate sensitivity of the model involved

5.4.4	Estimates Of Regional Change; Pre-industrial to 2030 (IPCC "Business-as-Usual" Scenario)

The leader should be aware of the limited ability of curient climate models to simulate regional climate change and assumptions made in denving the icgional estimates (Sections 5 4 2 and 5 4 3 lespcctively) The range oi values indicates the lange of uncertainty in regional changes ansing Irom using three different models with a sinnlai global sensitivity The results assume a global mean warming of 1 8°C at 2030, consistent with a global mean sensitivity of 2 5°C (Section 6 6 2) IPCC Scenario B gives lesults which arc about 15% lowei For a sensitivity ol 1 5°C, the estimates below should be reduced by 30%. foi a sensitivity of 4 5°C, they should be increased by 50% In gcncial, confidence in these estimates is low, especially for the changes in precipitation and soil moisture The regions are shown in Figure 5 13 and the estimates from the three individual models are given in Table 5 1

Central North America (35-50°N, 85-105°W)

The warming varies from 2 to 4°C in winter and 2 to 3°C in summer. Precipitation increases range from 0 to 15% in winter whereas there are deceases of 5 to 10% in summer Soil moisture decreases in summer by 15 to 20% of the present value.

Figure 5.13: IPCC regions for which area means are given in Section 5 4 4 and Table 5 1

South East Asia (5-30 N, 70-105 E)

The warming vanes fiom 1 to 2°C throughout the yeai Precipitation changes little in wintei and generally mc-leases throughout the region by 5 to 15% in summer Summer soil moisture increases by 5 to 10%

Sahel (10-20°N, 20°W-40°E)

The wanning ranges lrom 1 to 2°C Area mean precipitation increases and area mean soil moisture deci eases marginally in summer However there arc areas ol both mcicase and decrease in both parameters throughout the legion which dif ter from model to model

Southern Europe (35-50°N, 10 W-45 E)

The wanning is about 2°C in winter and vanes from 2 to 3°C in summer There is some indication of increased piecipitation in wintei, but summei piecipitation decreases by 5 to 15%, and summer soil moisture by 15 to 25%

Australia (10-45°S, 110-155E)

The wanning ranges from 1 to 2°C in summer and is about 2°C in winter Summer precipitation increases by around 10%, but the models do not produce consistent estimates of the changes in soil moisture The area averages hide large vanations at the sub-continental level

Many of the differences in these results can be attributed to differences in model resolution, neglect or otherwise of ocean heat transport, and differences in the number of physical processes included and the way they aie iepiesented

5.5	Empirical Climate Forecasting

5.5.1	Introduction

In the light of the poor reliability of regional climate simulations using general circulation models, various authois have suggested the use of data fiom past climates as indicatois of icgional climatic relationships for piojcctions of future climate (foi example Flohn, 1977 Budyko et al , 1978, Budyko 1980, Kellogg and Schware 1981 Budyko and Iziael, 1987 Budyko et al , 1987) A bnet description of the method is given in Section 3 4 1

The mid-Holocene (5-6 kbp), the Last Interglacial (Eemian oi Mikiluno, 125-130 kbp) and the Pliocene (3-4 mbp) have been used as analogues foi iuture climates Januaiy July and mean annual tempciatuies and mean annual precipitation were reconstructed for each of the above thiee epochs (see Section 7 2 2) Estimates of the mean tempciatuies over the Northern Hemispheie exceed the piesent temperature by appioximately 1 2 and 3-4°C dunng the nnd-Holocene Eemian and Pliocene lespectiscly These pcnods vceie chosen as analogues of tutuic climate foi 2000 2025 and 2050 respectively

5.5.2	Results

5 5 2 1 Tempei atm e

Winter-time tempeiature changes in the low and middle latitude zones are quite small for aieas dominated by marine climates Winter cold is, however, less severe in the interior regions of the continents in middle and high latitudes Summei warming is greater mainly in high latitudes In some low latitude continental regions there aie some areas of cooling due to increasing evaporation resulting from mcicased precipitation over these regions

5 52 2 Pi capitation

The influence of global wanning on annual piecipitation over the continents appears to be more complicated than for air temperatuie Duung the nnd-Holocene, precipitation was greater than at present ovei most of the northern continents although there weie decreases in some regions oi the Euiopean temtory of the Soviet Union, as well as in some cenlial legions of the United States (Figuie 7 4b) Reconstructions of the Pliocene climate indicate that precipitation increased over all land areas for which data aie available, paiticulaily in a numbei of aieas that are now deserts (Figure 7 2b) Foi this epoch, the mean latitudinal increase in annual precipitation over the continents of the Northern Hemispheie seems to show little dependence on latitude, averaging approximately 20 cm yr’1 The tentative results foi the Eemian foi which data are less complete, indicate that piecipitation considerably exceeded the modern value in all regions for which data exist As discussed in Section 7 the data used in this study have various limitations, and it is possible that the need for datable material to survive has introduced a bias against finding evidence of aridity

5.5.3	Assessment Of Empirical Forecasts

1 Foi a climate situation in the past to he a detailed analoque of the likely climate in the next centuix with mcieased qieenhouse qas concentiation it is necessai \ foi the foicinq factois (eq qieenhouse qases oihital sanations) and the houndaiy conditions (e q ice cmeiaqe topoqiaphs etc ) to he similai

The change in forcing during the mid-Holocene and Eemian was very ddfeient to that due to doubling CO2 During both these periods, CO2 concentrations were smaller than present being close to the pre-industrial level (Barnola et al , 1987) The orbital perturbations increase the annual mean radiative heating in high latitudes (up to 5 Wm_2 during the nnd-Holocene) and reduce it in the tropics (1 Wm - duung the mid-Holocene) The radiative forcing due to doubling CO2 increases everywhere, fiom about 2 5 Wm’2 m high latitudes to 5 Wm - in the tropics (Mitchell 1990) The changes in oibital peituibations produce seasonal anomalies of up to 40 Wm’2 at certain latitudes (Berger 1979) wheieas the CCD forcing is

relatively constant thioughout the year Thus the midHolocene and Eemian cannot be considered as reliable analogues for a climate with inci eased concentrations of greenhouse gases

The changes in forcing during the Pliocene are less well known Carbon dioxide levels may have been higher than present, but whether or not they were as high as double present concentrations is disputed (Section 7 2 2 1) Other factors, such as a lower Himalayan massif and an open Isthmus of Panama (which would have profoundly affected the circulation of the North Atlantic) are likely to have altered the climate in those regions The geographical distribution of data for the Pliocene are limited and there are difficulties in establishing that data from different sites are synchronous (Section 7 2 2) In view of all these factors, it is at best unclear that the reconstiucted patterns of climate change during the Pliocene can be regarded as analogues of warming due to increases in greenhouse gases

2 Because mans aspects of climate cliani’e lespond to these fattens and conditions in a non lineal was duect compai isons with climate situations foi which these conditions do not apply cannot he easily mteipieted

The analogue method is based on the assumptions that the patterns of climate change are relatively insensitive to the different changes in forcing factors leading to warming Recent numerical studies of the equilibrium response to increased CO2 give a consistent picture of continental scale changes so one can compare the laige-scale features from these simulations with those deduced from the palaeoanalogue approach The mam discrepancies are

1) The palaeo climatic data surest a coohni’ o\ci lai t>e aieas of the tiopic s wluieas CO~_ simulations pioduce a substantial wanning

A cooling is consistent with the lcduction in insolation in the tropics during the mid-Holocene and Eemian, and is also reproduced in numcucal simulations in which the orbital pertuibations have been imposed (for example, Kutzbach and Guctter 1986, Mitchell et al , 1988) As noted above inc leases in CO2 produce a ladiative warming of the tropics, whereas the relevant changes in oibital properties produce a radiative cooling Thus on both simple physical giounds and on the basis of model simulations, the palaeo-chmatic reconstructions are probably misleading in this lespect

n) The palaeo climatic data sut^cst that pi ecipitation me 1 eases maikedls in much of the and subtiopu s of the N 01 them Hcmisphei e (fen esample COH MAP membei s 1988 Section 72 2 2 72 2 1) when as icccnt iiumencal simulations with enhanced CO2 indie ate little c hani’e tn these 1 et’ions

Thus, numerical simulations ol the mid-Holocene and Eemian pioduce increases in precipitation in much of the and subtropics because the enhanced summer insolation intensifies the summei monsoon circulations Again, on simple physical grounds and on the basis of model simulations (for example Kutzbach and Guctter, 1986, Mitchell et al 1988) it appeals that the changes in precipitation in the arid subtropics during these epochs are due to orbital changes

tn) The palaeo climatic data suc’i’est that the wen nuns’ (in the Noithein Hemispheie) m summei would he s’leatest m hit’ll latitudes wlieieas in model simulations with inc 1 eased CO2 (this section) 01 oihital peitmhations (foi example Kutzbach and Guctte) 1986 Mitchell et al 1988) the wainuns’ is small in hit’ll latitudes m summei

The simulated changes may be in error (though there is a plausible physical explanation) 01 the palaeo climatic data have been miscompiled 01 misinterpreted

From the above it seems likely that changes in orbital parameters alone can account lor much of the changes from present climate found in the mid-Holocene and the Eemian that some of the large scale effects of the orbital perturbations differ from those expected with an metease in trace gases, and therefore that a necessaiy condition foi these periods to be considered as analogues for future climate change is that the effects of orbital vanations should be subtracted out At piesent, theie is no way of doing this apait horn using simulated changes

In conclusion the palaeo analogue appioach is unable to give icliablc estimates of the equilibrium climatic effect of incieases in gieenhousc gases as suitable analogues aic not available and it is not possible to allow foi the deficiencies in the analogues which aie available Neveitheless information on past climates will piovide useful data against which to test the performance of climate models when run with appropriate forcing and boundaiy conditions (See Section 4 10) It should be noted that fiont the point ol view of understanding and testing climate mechanisms and models palaeo climatic data on cool epochs may be just as useful as data on warm epochs Special attention should be paid to times of relatively rapid climatic change when time-dependent effects and ecosystem responses may more closely icsemble those to be expected in the coming century

5.6	The Climatic Effect of Vegetation Changes

5.6.1	Introduction

In addition to the climatic impacts of increasing greenhouse gases alteration of vegetation cover by man can modily the climate For small areas this may result in only local

impacts, but tor large areas it may result in important regional climate change, and may impinge upon regions remote from the area ol change

The vegetative cover (or lack of it) strongly controls the amount of solar radiative heating absorbed by the land surface by varying the albedo (reflectivity) Heat absorbed by the surface, in addition to heating the soil, piovides eneigy for evaporation and for heating the atmosphere directly (sensible heat) Thus, changes in albedo can strongly affect evaporation and atmospheric heating and so influence the hydrological cycle and atmospheric circulation Other aspects of vegetation cover, such as aerodynamic roughness, stomatai iesistance canopy moisture capacity and rooting depth can affect the paititioning of incoming solai ladiation between evapoiation and sensible heat

There aic three climatic regions wheie vegetation changes may have significant impacts on climate tropical lorests, semi-arid and savannah and boreal forests The fust has received considerable attention and is covered in more detail below and in Section 10 Model studies of degradation of vegetation in the Sahel region of Afnca, particularly with regard to changes in albedo and soil moisture availability, have shown that rainfall can be reduced over a wide part of the region (Rowntree and Sangster, 1986) Removal of boreal forests has been shown to delay spring snowmelt slightly by increasing albedo (Thomas, 1987)

5.6.2	Global Mean Effects

I The net effect of defin e station on I’lobal mean climate is likely to be small although the lei’ional impacts mas be pi ofonnd

The conversion of forests to grassland is increasing in the tiopics The current rate of deforestation is estimated to be 0 1 x 1()6 km2 yr-' (the total area of tropical forest is about 9 x 1()6 km2) Associated with the dealing is a substantial lelease ol CCb to the atmospheic (Section 1) The replacement of forest by grassland also mcieases the ieflection of solar ladiation to space which tends to cool the climate, but this eflcct is at present small compaied with the wanning effect of the accompanying mcieased CCb (see Section 1, 2 2 2, Section 2) The net eflect of deforestation is therefore to warm climate The removal of all the tiopical lorests could warm the climate by about 0 VC ’ Alternatively, if 10% of the Earths land surface

’ Assuming that 13\10bkm~ of finest is lemosed and leleases 12 SGt CIlQbkm- (based on Bohn et al 1986) m ith half the i esulting CO2 1 emainmgm the atmospliei e Also it is assumed that def in estation 111c i c uses the sui fac e albedo by 5r/< and that mils 50c/c of the insolation at the top of the atmospliei e 1 eac lies the smface The climate sensitisits is taken to be 3 °C foi a doubling of CO2

were afforested in addition to the present cover, a global cooling of 0 2 to 0 4°C would be expected

5.6.3	Regional Effects: Deforestation Of Amazonia

One of the best studied examples of deforestation is the Amazon Basin Besides changing net carbon storage in Amazonia defoiestation is affecting the regional energy and watei balance A number of modelling studies have concentiated on the climatic impact that might arise from complete deforestation of South America and, in particular, Amazonia (Hendeison-Sellers and Gormtz. 1984, Wilson, 1984, Dickinson and Hendeison-Sellers, 1988, Lean and Wamlow 1989, Nobie et al , 1990) The Amazon Basin contains about half of the world s tropical rainforests and plays a significant lole in the climate of that region It is estimated that appioximatcly half of the local rainfall is derived fiom local evaporation (Salati et al , 1978) The remainder is dcnved fiom moisture advected from the surrounding oceans A major modification of the forest cover could theiefore have a significant climatic impact Reduced evaporation and a general reduction in rainfall, although by variable amounts, was found in most experiments

/ Total de fm c station of the Amazon basin could 1 educe lamfall locally by 20%

The studies by Lean and Warnlow (1989) and Nobre et al (1990) show leductions ol about 20% in rainfall in simulations in which vegetation parameters for forest were replaced by those lor giassland (Figuie 5 14) Lean and Warrilow showed that albedo and roughness changes contributed almost equally to the lamfall reduction, although moie recent work suggests that the contribution fiom roughness may have been slightly oveiestimated

Nobre et al suggest that the switch to a more seasonal rainfall legimc which they obtained, would prevent forest recovery A 1 ecent experiment (Lean and Rowntree, 1989, personal communication) considered the impact of setting vegetation covei to dcscit over South Amenca noith of 30°S Albedos similai to those of the most icilective parts of the Sahaia weic used Annual rainlall was reduced by 70% The seasonal change of rainfall (Figure 5 15) became typical of that obseived in senn-arid regions such as the Sahel This would permit the growth of some rainy season vegetation and thus a desert would be unlikely to be maintained over the whole region However, the results suggest that a widespread deforestation of the South American tropics could lead to an irreversible decline in rainfall and vegetative cover over at least part of the region

5.7	Uncertainties

Here we summaiize the major uncertainties in model predictions

Figure 5.14: Changes in annual means due to deforestation of northern South America (from Nobre et al ,1990) (a) Surface temperature (contours every 1°C), (b) Precipitation (contouis every 1 mm day *, negative contours are dashed)

One of the largest sources of uncertainty in the simulation of equilibrium climate change lies in the prediction ol clouds It has been shown that clouds can produce either a positive or negative feedback depending on the model and paiameterization ol cloud used (Cess et al 1989 Mitchell et al . 1989) giving an uncertainty of a factoi of two or more in the cquilibnum wanning Eailiei schemes base cloud cover on relative humidity and

Time (months)

Jul	Oct	Jan	Apr

Figure 5.15: Rainfall over South America (2 5 to 30°S, mm day1) Dashed line simulated, forested surface, Solid line simulated, desert surface Dots, observed (Lean and Rowntree personal communication, 1989)

prescribed radiative properties later models use schemes which explicitly represent cloud water and allow cloud radiative properties to vary The latter are more detailed but not necessarily more accurate as more parameters have to be specified The radiative effect of clouds depends on cloud height, thickness and fractional cover on cloud water content and cloud droplet size distribution (and in the case of ice clouds the size distribution shape and onentalion of particles) (see Section 3 3 4) Thus theie is a need to understand both the microphysics of cloud and then relation to the laigei scale cloud propeities This will require further satellite observations (foi example Barkstrom et al , 1986) and caielully designed held studies (foi example Raschkc 1988 Cox et al 1987) In particular, theie is a need to refine oui knowledge of ice clouds and then radiative properties

Another laige uncertainty lies in the icpiesentation ol convection in large-scale models Again the moie detailed (though not necessarily moie accurate) paiametcrizations produce dilfcrcnt results from the simplei schemes including a much greater warming in the tropics It is less obvious how to reduce this uncertainty though it may be that a comparison of the observed and simulated response to past anomalies in tropical SSTs may help to eliminate the more unrealistic schemes

Thndly, the changes in giound wetness and suitace temperatuie have been shown to be highlv sensitise to the ticatment of the land surface In addition the effects of vegetation and changes in vegetation aie ignoied in the models used in Table 3 2a Again piocess studies done with satellite measurements (Woild Meteoioloaical

Organization, 1985, 1987) are needed to guide the development of surface parameterizations and their validations.

Finally the oceans and sea-ice constitute a major source of uncertainty about which more is said in Section 6. Here it has been shown that the distribution of sea-ice and changes in sea-ice extent have a dominant influence on local temperature change, especially in winter. Most of the models considered here ignore salinity effects and possible changes in ocean heat and ice transport: some ignore ocean transport altogether. The inclusion of a more complete representation of the ocean may modify the simulated changes in sea-ice described here, and changes in ocean circulation could produce pronounced local anomalies in SST particularly in the neighbourhood of the major current systems or the main areas of deep water formation, with profound effects on the local climate.

References

Barkstrom, B.R. and ERBE Science team. 1986: First data from the Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE). Bull. Am. Met. Sac.. 67, 818-824.

Barnola, J.M., D.Raynaud, Y.S. Korotkevich and C.Lorius, 1987: Vostok ice core provides 160.000-year record of atmospheric CO2. Nature, 329, 408-413.

Bates, G.A. and G.A.Meehl, 1986: The effect of CO? concentration on the frequency of blocking in a general circulation model coupled to a simple mixed layer ocean model. Mon.Wea.Rev., 114, 687-701.

Bengtsson, L., H.Bottger and M.Kanamitsu. 1982: Simulation of hurricane type vortices in a general circulation model. Tellus, 34, 440-457.

Berger, A., 1979: Insolation signatures of Quaternary climatic changes. // Nuovo Cimento, 20(1), 63-87.

Blackmon. M., 1975: A climatological spectral study of 500mb geopotential height of the northern hemisphere. J.Atmos Sei., 37. 1607-162.3.

Bolin , B.. B.R. Doos, J. Jager and R.A. Warrick (eds), 1986:"77/e Greenhouse Effect, Climate Change and Ecosystems. SCOPE 13. Wiley, New York.

Broccoli. A. and S. Manabe, 1990: Will global warming increase the frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones? (submitted for publication).

Bud.vko. M.l. et al., 1978: "Forthcoming climate change", Izvestia AN USSR.

Bud.vko. M.I., 1980: "Climate of the past and future", Gidrometeorizdat, 352pp.

Bud.vko. M.I., A.B.Ronov and A.L.Yanshin, 1987: History of the Earth's atmosphere (English translation) Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 139pp.

Bud.vko. M.l. and Y.Izrael. 1987: "Anthropogenic climate change". Gidrometeorizdat. 406pp.

Cess. R.D. and G.L. Potter. 1988: A Methodology for understanding and Intercomparing atmospheric climate feedback processes in general circulation models../. Geophys. Res.. 93. 8305-8314.

Cess. R.D.. G.L. Potter, J.P. Blanchet, G.J. Boer. S.J. Ghan, J.T. Kiehl, H. Le Treut, Z.X. Li, X.Z. Liang, J.F.B. Mitchell. J-J. Morcrette. D.A. Randall. M.R. Riches. E. Roeckner, U. Schlese. A. Slingo. K.E. Taylor, W.M. Washington. R.T. Wetherald. I. Yagai. 1989: Interpretation of cloud-climate feedback as produced by 14 atmospheric general circulation models. Science, 245, 513-516.

Cox, S.K., D.S. McDougall, D.A. Randall and R.A.Schiffer. 1987: FIRE (First ISCCP Regional Experiment). Bull. Am. Met. Soc.. 68. 114-118.

COHMAP Members, 1988: Climatic changes of the last 18,000 years: Observations and model simulations. Science, 241, 1043-1052.

Cunnington. W.M. and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1990: On the dependence of climate sensitivity on convective parametrization. Climate Dynamics, 4, 85-93.

Dell'Osso, L. and L.Bengtsson, 1985: Prediction of a typhoon using a finemesh NWP model. Tellus, 37A. 97-105.

Dickinson, R.E.. 1986: How will climate change? In The Greenhouse Effect, Climate Change and Ecosystems, eds. B.

Bolin, B.R. Doos, J. Jager and R.A. Warrick, SCOPE 13, Wiley, New York. 206-270.

Dickinson, R.E. and A.Henderson-Sellers , 1988: Modelling tropical deforestation: a study of GCM land-surface parametrizations. Quart J.R.Met.Soc., 114, 439-462.

Emanuel, K.A., 1987: The dependence of hurricane intensity on climate. Nature. 326, 483-485.

Fels, S.B., J.D. Mahlman. M.D. Schwarzkopf and R.W. Sinclair, 1980: Stratospheric sensitivity to perturbations in ozone and carbon dioxide: radiative and dynamical response. ./. Atmos. Sci„ 37, 2266-2297.

Flohn, H., 1977: Climate and energy: A Scenario to the 21st Century. Climatic Change, 1. 5-20.

Gray, W.M., 1979: Hurricanes: their formation, structure and likely role in the tropical circulation. In Meteorology over the tropical oceans (ed. D.B. Shaw) Roy. Meteor. Soc., 155-218.

Grotch, S. L., 1988: Regional intercomparisons of general circulation model predictions and historical climate data. U.S.

Dept, of Energy, Washington D.C. Report DOE/NBB-0084 (TR041).

Hansen, J., A.Lacis, D. Rind, L. Russell, P. Stone. I. Fung, R. Ruedy and J. Lerner, 1984: Climate Sensitivity Analysis of Feedback Mechanisms. In Climate Processes and Climate Sensitivity (ed. J. Hansen and T. Takahashi) Geophysical Monograph 29, 130-163. American Geophysical Union, Washington DC.

Hansen, J., D. Rind, A. Delgenio, A. Lacis, S. Lebedeff, M. Prather, R. Ruedy and T. Karl 1989: Regional greenhouse climate effects. In Coping with climate change, Proceedings of Second North American Conference on Preparing for climatic change. Dec. 6-8, 1988. Washington DC, pp 696.

Henderson-Sellers, A. and V.Gornitz, 1984: Possible climatic impacts of land cover transformations, with particular emphasis on tropical deforestation. Climatic Change, 6, 231 -258.

Ingram. W.J.. C.A. Wilson and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1989: Modelling climate change: an assessment of sea-ice and surface albedo feedbacks. ./. Geophys Res.. 94, 8609-8622.

Kellogg, W.W. and R.Schware. 1981: Climate Change and

Society. Westview Press. Boulder. Colorado.

Krishnamurti. T.N., D. Oosterhof and N.Dignon, 1989' Huincane prediction with a high lesolution global model. Mon Wea Res' , 117, 631-669.

Kut/.bach. J E., and P.J. Guetter, 1986: The influence of changing orbital paiametcrs and surface boundary conditions on climate simulations foi the past 18,000 years. J Atmos Set , 43, 1726-1759.

Lean, J., and D.A. Warnlow, 1989. Simulation of the regional impact of Amazon deforestation, Nature, 342, 411-413.

Manabe, S. and R.J. Stoufler, 1980. Sensitivity of a global climate model to an increase in the CCb concentration in the atmosphere. ./ Geophss Res., 85, 5529-5554.

Manabe, S., K.Biyan and M.D Spelman, 1990: Transient lesponse of a global ocean-atmospheie model to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide. .7 Phvs Oceanogi. (To appear, April).

Manabe, S. and K. Biyan, 1985: CO? - Induced change in a coupled Ocean-Atmospheie Model and its Palaeo-climatic Implications. ./ Geophss Res., 90, Cl 1. 11,689-11,707.

Manabe, S. and R.T. Wetherald, 1987' Large scale changes of soil wetness induced by an increase in atmospheric caibon dioxide. ./ Atmos Sci.,44. 1211-1235.

Manabe, S., J.L.Holloway Jr. and H.M.Stone. 1970 Tropical circulation in a time integration of a global model of the atmosphere. J Atmos Sc i , 21. 580-613

Mearns, L.O., R.W.Katz and S.H. Schneidei, 1984: Extieme high temperature events: changes in their probabilities with changes in mean temperature. ./ Chm App Meteorol. 23. 1601-13.

Mearns, L.O., S.H. Schneidei, S.L. Thompson and L.R. McDaniel, 1990: Analysis of climatic vailability in general circulation models: comparison with observations and changes in variability in 2xCC>2 experiments. (submitted tor publication)

Meehl, G.A. and W.M. Washington, 1988: A comparison of soil moisture sensitivity in two global climate models. ./ Atmos Sc i., 45, 1476-1492.

Meehl, G.A. and W.M. Washington, 1989 CO? Climate Sensitivity and snow-sea-ice albedo parametuzation in an Atmospheric GCM coupled to a Mixed-Layer Ocean Model. Climatic Change (to appear).

Merrill. R.T., 1988: Environmental influences on hurricane intensification. J Atmos Sc i . 45, 1678-1687.

Mintz, Y , 1984: The sensitivity of numeiically simulated climates to land-surface boundary conditions. In The Global Climate (cd. J.T. Houghton), 79-106. Cambridge University Press.

Mitchell, J.F.B., 1989: The "Greenhouse effect" and climate change. Reviews of Geophysics , 27, 115-139.

Mitchell, J.F.B., 1990: Greenhouse wanning: is the Holocene a good analogue?./ of Climate (to appear).

Mitchell, J.F.B. and W.J. Ingram, 1990: On CO2 and climate. Mechanisms of changes in cloud. J of Climate (submitted).

Mitchell, J.F.B.. N.S. Grahame, and K.J. Needham. 1988-Climate Simulations lor 9000 years before present: Seasonal vaiiations and the effect of the Laurentide Ice Sheet. ./ Geophss. Res . 93. 8283-8303.

Mitchell, J.F.B.. C.A Wilson and W.M. Cunnington. 1987. On CO2 climate sensitivity and model dependence of lesults. Quan JR Metemol Soc ,113.293-322

Mitchell, J.F B. and D A. Warnlow. 1987: Summci dryness in northern mid-latitudes due to increased CO2- Natiiie, 330. 238240.

Mitchell, J.F.B., C.A. Senior and W.J. Ingram. 1989. CO2 and climate: a missing feedback? Nature. 341, 132-4

Morris, R.M., 1989: Forecasting the evolution of tiopical storms over the South Indian Oceans and South Pacific during the 1988-9 season using the United Kingdom Meteoiological Office opeiationaf global model, (unpublished manuscript).

Nobre. C.J.Shukla. and P.Sellers. 1990- Amazon Dcfoiestation and Climate Change. Sc lenc e, 247, 1322-5

Noda. A and T. Tokioka, 1989' The effect of doubling the CO2 concentration on convective and non-convective piecipitation in a general circulation model coupled with a simple mixed layei ocean ./ Mel Soc Japan. 67, 1055-67

Parry. M.L. and T.R. Carter. 1985: The effect of climatic vanation on agncultural risk. Climatic Change. 7. 95-1 10.

Pittock, A.B., 1989: The greenhouse effect, legional climate change and Austialian agncultuie. Pick 5th Agiononis Conf . Austn Soc. Agron.. Perth. 289-303

Rashke. E.. 1988. The International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP). and its European regional cxpenmcnt ICE (Intelnational Cinus Experiment) Atmos Res . 21. 191-201

Raval. A and V Ramanathan. 1989: Observational determination of the greenhouse effect. Natme. 342. 758-761

Rind. D.. R. Goldberg, J. Hansen, C. Rosensweig and R Ruedy, 1989a, Potential evapotranspiration and the likelihood of future drought. (Submitted to./ Geophvs Res )

Rind. D.. R. Goldberg and R. Ruedy. 1989b: Change in climate vanability in the 21st century. Climatic Change. 14,5-37.

Roeckner. E.. U. Schlese. J. Biercamp and P. Loewe. 1987: Cloud optical depth feedbacks and climate modelling. Natme. 329, 138-139.

Rowntree. P.R. and A.B.Sangstei. 1986: Remote sensing needs identified in climate model experiments with hydiological and albedo changes in the Sahel. Proc ISLSCP Conleience, Rome. Euiopean Space Agency ESA SP-248, pp 175-183.

Salati. E., Marques,J and L C.B.Molion, 1978 Ongem e Distnbuicao das Chuvas na Amazonia. Intel 1 tenc ui. 3. 200206.

Schlesinger, M.E., 1985: Feedback analysis of lesults fiom energy balance and ladiative-convectivc models In Pi ejecting the climatic effects of inc teasing atmosphei e caibon chosule. ed.M.C. MacCracken and F.M. Luther, pp 280-319. US Department of Energy, Washington DC, 1985. (Available as NT1S, DOE ER-0237 from Nat.Tech. Inf. Serv. Springfield Va.)

Schlesinger, M.E. and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1985: Model Projection of Equilibrium Climatic Response to Incieased CO2 Concentration. In Projecting the climatic effects of inc leasing atmosphere caibon dioxide. ed.M.C. MacCracken and F.M Luthei. pp 280-319, US Department of Eneigy. Washington DC, 1985. (Available as NTIS, DOE ER-0237 from Nal.Tech. Inf. Serv. Springfield Va.).

Schlesinger ME and J F B Mitchell 1987 Climate model simulations ol the equilibttum climatic response to incieased cat bon dioxide Ro trti s of Gcophssu s 25 760-798

Siegmund P 1990 The effect of doubling COo on the stoim tracks in the climate of a GCM KN Ml leport No 90-01

Smith R N B 1990 A scheme for predicting layer clouds and their water content in a general circulation model Quait JR Mclcoiol Soc 116 435 460

Somerville, RCJ and LA Remer, 1984 Cloud Optical Thickness Feedbacks in the CO2 Climate Problem I Geophss Res 89,9668-9672

Somerville, RCJ and S Iacobellis, 1988 Air sea Interactions and Cirrus Cloud feedbacks on climate In Proceedings of the 7th American Meteorological Society Conference on Oceanatmosphere Interaction, 53-55

Speiman MJ and S Manabe, 1984 Influence of Oceanic Heat Transport upon the Sensitivity of a model climate J Geophss Res, 89, 571 586

Stouffer RJ S Manabe and K Bryan, 1989 Interhemispheric asymmetry in climate response to a gradual increase of CO2 Ncituic 342 660 662

Thomas G , 1987 Land-use change and climate An investigation of climate modelling and climate monitoring techniques PhD thesis, University of Liverpool, UK

UNEP, 1989 Report on Scientific Assessment of Stratospheric Ozone

U.S. National Academy of Sciences, 1979 Carbon Dioxide and Climate A Scientific Assessment Washington D C pp22

Vinnikov, K Ya , and I B Eserkepova, 1989 Empirical data simulations of soil moisture regime Metecnologia 1 Gidiologia, 11,64 72

Wang, W C,G Y Shi and J T Kiehl 1990 Incorporation of the thermal radiative el feet ol CH4, N2O, CF2CI2 and CFCI3 into the Community Climate Model / Geopliys Res (to appear)

Washington, W M and G A Meehl, 1984 Seasonal Cycle Experiment on the Climate Sensitivity due to a doubling of CO2 with an Atmospheric General Circulation Model coupled to a simple mixed layer ocean model J Geoplis s Res , 89, 9475 9503

Washington, W M and G A Meehl, 1986 General Circulation model CO2 sensitivity experiments Snow ice albedo parameterizations and globally averaged surface air temperature Climatic Change, 8, 231 241

Wetherald, R T and S Manabe 1975 The effect of changing the solar constant on the climate of a general circulation model / Atmos Sc 1,32, 2044 2059

Wetherald, RT and S Manabe, 1988 Cloud Feedback Processes in a General Circulation Model J Atmos Sci, 45, 1397 1415

Wigley T ML, 1985 Climatology impact of extreme events Natuic 316, 106 7

Wigley TML and M E Schlesinger, 1985 Analytical solution tor the effect of increasing CO2 on global mean temperature Nairn c 315 649-652

Wilson CA, and JFB Mitchell, 1987a A doubled CO2 Climate Sensitivity experiment with a GCM including a simple ocean / Geophss Res 92 13315 13343

Wilson CA and JFB Mitchell, 1987b Simulated CCh induced climate change ovei western Europe Climatic Change 10 1 I 42

Wilson, M T 1984 The construction and use ol land surface inioimation in a general circulation model PhD thesis University of Liverpool, UK

World Meteorological Organisation, 1985 Development of the implementation plan for the International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project (ISLSCP) Phase I (eds H J Bolle and S I Rasool) WCP-94, Geneva

World Meteorological Organisation, 1987 Report of the second meeting of the scientific steering group on land surface processes and climate (Toulouse, France, 21-26 May, 1986) WCP-126, Geneva

^4to6°C

□ 2u’4°C

2] 0 io 2*C

more than I2°C

to 12 (

(bi DJF 2xCO, - 1xCO: surface air temperature: GFI11

|s to 12 C

§] 4 to 6°C

J 2 to 48C

2| 0 io 2°C

more Ilian I2°C

(c) DJF 2xCO, IxCO. surface air temperature: UKHI

more

Ilian 12 C

| S 12 C

Q2to4°C

2 (I to 2°C

Figure 5,4: Change in surface air temperature (ten year means) due to doubling CO.. for months December January-February, as simulated by three high resolution models: (a) CCC: Canadian Climate Centre (Boer, pcrs. comm.. 1989). (b) GFHI: Geophysical Fluids Dynamics Laboratory (Manabe and Wcihernld. pers.comm., 1990), and (c) UKHI: United Kingdom Meteorological Office (Mitchell and Senior, pers. comm., 1990). Sec legend for contour details.

H 6 lo S t

lobt

(d) JJA 2x00. - 1 xCO. surface air icirij^ernturc: COO

J 6 to fix’

Q 4 10 (j"C

□ 2 to 4*0

Jo to2oC

more

Ilian 12’0

(e) J J A 2x420; - lxCO, surface air temperature; GFHI

86 to b°c

J 4 to (AC

D2 io 4°c I 10 to 2’0

more

than 12*C

(f) JJA 2x00- - IxCO. surface air temperature: (JKHJ

| s to 12 C

[] 6 tutor

J 4 toft’C

J 2 io 4°C

|~~|<> to 2’0

more

than 12’0

■ I DJF 2xCO. - I* CO, precipitation: CCC

□ I) to I nnn day’1

j" J D to -hum day1

mure Hi an

2mm day 1

-I to -2mm

less than -2 mm day 1

day 1

day '

□ 0 to J mm day

j 10 to -hum day '

■ more than

2 mm day 1

I lo 2mm day

to -2mm day '1

less than

-2mm day 1

ic) DJF 2xC'O_. - IxCO; precipitation: UK! If

■ more than

2mm day'1

I to 2mm day

□ 0 to Imnf day '

□ II to-1mm day'1

□

-1 to -2mm day 1

Olcss than

-2mm day

(d) JJA 2xCO. - IxCO. precipitation: CCC

□ 0 to I mm day 1

□ 0 to -I mm day

more than

2mm day

■ less than

-2mm day 1

(ci JJ A 2xCO; - I *CO, precipitation: GI Hi

□ I) to 1mm day

□ 0 to -1mm day

■ more than

2 mm day ’

I to 2mm day 1

—2mm day 1

less than -2 mtn day '

|	10 to lmm day

□ i) to -1mm day

more than

2mm day

to -2mm Jay1

less than -2mm day

(a) PJF 2xCO, - lxCOj soil moisture: CCC

|	[ ti io -1cm

more than 2cm

-1 to -2cm

□ less

than -2cm

■ mere

than 2cm

0 to tern

|	[ 0 to -lent

|	| -1 lo -2cm

□

less than -2cm

(c| DJ F 2xCO, - I xCO; soil moisture: U Kill

□ more

Ilian 2cm

□ () to 1cm

| (I to-1cm

[ 11~ 1 lo-2cm

□

less than -2cm

(d) JJA 2xCO: - lx CO, sail moislure: CCC

more

I han 2cm

| hi 2cm

I] 0 to lcnl

"Jo to-1cm

-1 lo -2cm

□ less

than -2cm

(e) JJA 2xCO; - IxCOj soil moisture: GFHI

more than 2cm

| 0 to -1cm

| I to 2cm

(f) JJA 2xCOj - IxCO, soil moisture: UKHl

□ 0 lo lcm

□ 0 lo - lcm



less

than -2cm

more

I li nn 2cm

less than -2cm

to -2cm

i.i) Yeats of the time-dependent temperatu^fl response

more than 12 C

| X |<! 1? < ■

[ijj 6 to S3C

2| 4 to 6°C

2| 2 to 44C

[	| <1 to2*C

(b) Equilibrium temperature response

more than 12’C

|	2 X Io I? f

214 tofi’C

|	12 to 4 C

2| 0 to 2°C

more than 1.0

[~T] ll.X in l.ll

2 0-6 io 0.8

210,4 to 0.6

|	10.2 Io 0.4

2 0 to 0.2

t'igun 6,5; <a i The tinic-depc intent response of surface air tempera*ure ( C) in llie coupled ocearv-atmosplicre model to a 1% yr 1 increase of atmospheric (I.).. I be difference between ilie 1% yr ' perturbation run and years MJ-8Q of 1 he control run when the aimosplteric CO, concern rafon approximately doubles is shown. (h)The equilibrium response of surface air temperature (°Ci in the at nnisphcre-mixed layer ocean model toa doubling of atmospheric C'O-. (c)The ratio of the lime-dependent to equilibrium responses shown aboue. From Mannite, per*. comm. (I99D). See legends for contour details.

(a) 1950-1959 surface temperature anomalies

J 0.25 to 0.5DC

|	10 io I1.2.VC

« lO-O.ZS’C

1-0.25 m-0.5s C

less than IJ.5 C

more

(han 0.75’C

to 0.75“C

(bl 1967-1976 surface temperature anomalies

|	| 0 io 0.25C

> lo -11.25'C

mure

than 0.754C

{c} I QKii - J 9S9 surface le mpe ra I u re anomalies

U (1.5 in 0.75°d

□ (1.25 tri 11.5 I

[	(I to l>. 25DC

more

than 0.75'C

11 to-0.25 C

less

than — 0.5 <’

to (l_5°(

lilinre 7.13: Decadal surface tern pc rm tire anomalies, relttiiic to 1951-80, fa) 1950-1959. (b) 1967-76. I9S( I-X9. Land air temperatures fu mi l’l>. .lories and sea surface temperatures from the I lulled Kingdom Me teom logical Office. See legend for enntuur details. White areas show where there arc instifliciem data.

6

Time-Dependent Greenhouse-Gas-Induced

Climate Change

F.P. BRETHERTON, K. BRYAN, J.D. WOODS

Contributors:

J. Hansen; M. Hoffert; X. Jiang; S. Manabe; G. Meehl; S.C.B. Raper; D. Rind; M. Schlesinger; R. Stouffer; T. Volk; T.M.L. Wigley.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary	177	6.5 An Illustrative Example  6.5.1 The Experiment	183  183
6.1 Introduction	179	6.5.2 Results	184
6.1.1 Why Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Models ?	179	6.5.3 Discussion	185
6.1.2 Types of Ocean Models	179	6.5.4 Changes in Ocean Circulation	187
6.1.3 Major Sources of Uncertainty	180		
		6.6 Projections of Future Global Climate Change	187
6.2 Expectations Based on Equilibrium Simulations	180	6.6.1 An Upwelling Diffusion Model	187
		6.6.2 Model Results	188
6.3 Expectations Based on Transient Simulations	181	6.6.3 Discussion	190
6.4 Expectations Based on Time-Dependent		6.7 Conclusions	191
Simulations	181		
6.4.1 Changes in Surface Air Temperature	181	References	192
6.4.2 Changes in Soil Moisture	183		

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The slowly changing response of climate to a gradual increase in greenhouse gas concentrations can only be modelled ngourously using a coupled ocean-atmosphere general circulation model with full ocean dynamics This has now been done by a small number of researchers using coarse resolution models out to 100 years Their results show that

a)	For a steadily increasing forcing, the global rise in temperature is an approximately constant fraction of the equilibrium rise corresponding to the instantaneous forcing for a time that is earlier by a fixed offset For an atmospheric model with temperature sensitivity 4°C for a doubling of CO2, this fraction is approximately 66% with an offset of 11 years In rough terms, the response is about 60% of the current equilibrium value Extrapolation using robust scaling principles indicates that for a sensitivity of 1 5°C the corresponding values are 85% 6 years and 80% respectively

b)	The regional patterns of temperature and precipitation change generally resemble those of an equilibrium simulation for an atmospheric model, though uniformly reduced in magnitude Exceptional regions are around Antarctica and in the northern North Atlantic, where the warming is much less

c)	These results are generally consistent with our understanding of the present circulation in the ocean, as evidenced by geochemical and other tracers However, available computer power is still a serious limitation on

model capability, and existing observational data are inadequate to resolve basic issues about the relative roles of various mixing processes, thus affecting the confidence level that can be applied to these simulations

d)	The conclusions about the global mean can be extended though with some loss of rigour, by using a simple energy balance climate model with an upwelling diffusion model of the ocean, similar to that used to simulate CCh uptake It is inferred that, if a steadily increasing greenhouse forcing were abruptly stabilized to a constant value thereafter, the global temperature would continue to rise at about the same rate for some 10-20 years, following which it would increase much more slowly approaching the equilibrium value only over many centuries

e)	Based on the IPCC Business as Usual scenarios, the energy-balance upwelling diffusion model with best judgement parameters yields estimates of global warming from pre-industnal times (taken to be 1765) to the year 2030 between 1 3°C and 2 8°C, with a best estimate of 2 0°C This corresponds to a predicted rise from 1990 of 0 7-1 5°C with a best estimate of 1 1°C

Temperature rise from pre-industnal times to the year 2070 is estimated to be between 2 2°C and 4 8°C with a best estimate of 3 3°C This corresponds to a predicted rise from 1990 of 1 6°C to 3 5°C, with a best estimate of 2 4°C

6.1	Introduction

6.1.1	Why Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Models ?

The responses discussed in Section 5 are for a radiative forcing that is constant for the few years required for the atmosphere and the surface of the ocean to achieve a new equilibrium following an abrupt change Though the atmospheric models are detailed and highly developed, the treatment of the ocean is quite primitive However, when greenhouse gas concentrations are changing continuously, the thermal capacity of the oceans will delay and effectively reduce the observed climatic response At a given time, the realized global average temperature will reflect only part of the equilibrium change for the corresponding instantaneous value of the forcing Of the remainder, part is delayed by storage in the stably stratified layers of the upper ocean and is realized within a few decades or perhaps a century, but another part is effectively invisible for many centuries or longer, until the heating of the deep ocean begins to influence surface temperature In addition, the ocean currents can redistribute the greenhouse warming spatially, leading to regional modifications of the equilibrium computations Furthermore, even without changes in the radiative forcing, interactions between the ocean and atmosphere can cause interannual and inter-decadal fluctuations that can mask longer term climate change for a while

To estimate these effects, and to make reliable predictions of climate change under realistic scenarios of increasing forcing, coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (GCMs) are essential Such models should be designed to simulate the time and space dependence of the basic atmospheric and oceanic variables, and the physical processes that control them, with enough fidelity and resolution to define regional changes over many decades in the context of year to year variability In addition, the reasons for differences between the results of different models should be understood

6.1.2	Types of Ocean Models

The ocean circulation is much less well observed than the atmosphere, and there is less confidence in the capability of models to simulate the controlling processes As a result, there are several conceptually different types of ocean model in use for studies of greenhouse warming

The simplest representation considered here regards the ocean as a body with heat capacity modulated by downward diffusion below an upper mixed layer and a horizontal heat flux divergence within the mixed layer These vary with position, but are prescribed with values that result, in association with a particular atmosphenc model running under present climatic conditions in simulations which fit observations foi the annual mean surface temperature, and the annual cycle about that mean

In such a no surprises ocean (Hansen et al , 1988) the horizontal currents do not contribute to modifications of climate change

A more faithful representation is to treat the additional heat associated with forcing by changing greenhouse gases as a passive tracer which is advected by three-dimensional currents and mixed by specified diffusion coefficients intended to represent the sub-grid scale processes These currents and mixing coefficients may be obtained from a GCM simulating the present climate and ocean circulation, including the buoyancy field, in a dynamically consistent manner Using appropriate sources, the distributions ol transient and other tracers such as temperature-salinity relationships, 14C, tritium and CFCs are then inferred as a separate, computationally relatively inexpensive, step and compared with observations Poorly known parameters such as the horizontal and vertical diffusion coefficients are typically adjusted to improve the fit In box-diffusion models, which generally have a much coarser resolution, the currents and mixing are inferred directly from tracer distributions or are chosen to represent the aggregated effect of transports within a more detailed GCM Though potential temperature (used to measure the heat content per unit volume) affects the buoyancy of sea-water and hence is a dynamically active variable, a number of studies (e g , Bryan et al , 1984) have demonstrated that small, thermally driven, perturbations in a GCM do in fact behave in the aggregate very much as a passive tracer This approach is useful for predicting small changes in climate from the present, in which the ocean currents and mixing coefficients themselves are assumed not to vary in a significant manner There are at present no clear guidelines as to to what is significant for this purpose

A complete representation requires the full power of a high resolution ocean GCM, with appropriate boundary conditions at the ocean surface involving the wind stress, net heat flux and net freshwater flux obtained from an atmospheric model as a function of time in exchange for a simulation of the ocean surface temperature The explicit simulation of mixing by mesoscale eddies is feasible and highly desirable (Semtner and Chervin 1988), but it requires high spatial resolution, and so far the computer capacity required for 100 year simulations on a coupled global eddy resolving ocean-atmosphere GCM has not been available Sea-ice dynamics are needed as well as thermodynamics, which is highly parameterized in existing models For a fully credible climate prediction what is required is such a complete, dynamically consistent representation, thoroughly tested against observations

General circulation models of the coupled ocean atmosphere system have been under development for many years but they have been restricted to coarse resolution models in which the mixing coefficients in the ocean must

be prescribed ad hoc, and other unphysical devices are needed to match the ocean and atmospheric components Despite these limitations, such models are giving results that seem consistent with our present understanding of the broad features of the ocean circulation, and provide an important tool for extending the conclusions of the equilibrium atmospheric climate models to time dependent situations, at least while the ocean circulation does not vary greatly from the present

Because running coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs is expensive and time consuming many of our conclusions about global trends in future climates are based upon simplified models, in which parts of the system are replaced by highly aggregated constructs in which key formulae are inferred from observations or from other, non-mtcractive, models An energy-balance atmospheric model coupled to a one dimensional upwelling-diffusion model of the ocean provides a useful conceptual framework, using a tracer representation to aid the interpretation of the results of the GCMs, as well as a powerful tool for quickly exploring future scenarios of climate change

6.1.3	Major Sources of Uncertainty

An unresolved question related to the coarse resolution of general circulation models is the extent to which the details of the mixing processes and ocean currents may affect the storage of heat on different time scales and hence the fraction of the equilibrium global temperature rise that is realized only after several decades as opposed to more quickly or much more slowlv Indeed this issue rests in turn on questions whether the principal control mechanisms governing the sub-grid scale mixing are correctly incorporated For a more detailed discussion see Section 48

Paralleling these uncertainties are serious limitations on the observational data base to which all these models are compared, and from which the present rates of circulation are inferred These give rise to conceptual differences of opinion among oceanographers about how the circulation actually functions

Existing observations of the large scale distribution of temperature, salinity and other geochemical tracers such as tritium and 14C do indicate that near surface water sinks deep into the water column to below the main thermocline, primarily in restricted regions in high latitudes in the North Atlantic and around the Antarctic continent Associated with these downwelling regions, but not not necessarily colocated, are highly localized patches of intermittent deep convection, or turbulent overturning of a water column that is gravitationally unstable Though controlled to a significant extent by salinity variations rather than by temperature, this deep convection can transfer heat vertically very rapidly

However, much less clear is the return path of deep water to the ocean surface through the gravitationally stable thermocline which covers most of the ocean It is disputed whether the most important process is nearly horizontal motion bulk motion in sloping isopycnal surfaces of constant potential density, ventilating the thermocline laterally In this view, significant mixing across isopyncal surfaces occurs only where the latter intersect with the well mixed layer just below the ocean-atmosphere interface, which is stirred from above by the wind and by surface heat and water fluxes (Woods, 1984) Another view, still held by some oceanogiaphers, is that the dominant mechanism is externally driven in situ mixing in a gravitationally stable environment and can be described by a local bulk diffusivity To obtain the observations necessary to describe more accurately the real ocean circulation, and to improve our ability to model it for climate purposes, the World Ocean Circulation Experiment is currently underway (see Section 11)

6.2	Expectations Based on Equilibrium Simulations Besides the different types of model, it is important also to distinguish the different experiments that have been done with them

With the exception of the few time-dependent simulations described in Sections 6 3 - 66, perceptions of the geographical patterns of C02-mduced climate change have been shaped mainly by a generation of atmospheric GCMs coupled to simple mixed layer or slab ocean models (see review by Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1987) With these specified-depth mixed-layer models having no computed ocean heat transport, CO2 was instantaneously doubled and the models run to equilibrium Averages taken at the end of the simulations were used to infer the geographical patterns of CO2 induced climate change (Section 5)

Generally, the models agreed among themselves in a qualitative sense Surface air temperature increase was greatest in late autumn at high latitudes in both hemispheres, particularly over regions covered by sea-ice This was associated with a combination of snow/sea-ice albedo feedback and reduced sea-ice thermal inertia Soil moisture changes showed a tendency for drying of midcontinental regions in summer, but the magnitude and even the sign of the change was not uniform among the models (see also Section 5 2 2 3) This inconsistency is caused by a number of factors Some had to do with how soil moisture amounts were computed in the control simulations (Meehl and Washington, 1988), and some had to do with the method of simulating the land surface (Rind ct al, 1989) Also, all models showed a strong cooling in the lower stratosphere due to the radiative effects of the increased carbon dioxide

Recently, a new generation of coupled models has been run with atmospheric GCMs coupled to coarse-grid, dynamical ocean GCMs These models include realistic geography, but the coarse grid of the ocean part (about 500 km by 500 km) necessitates the parameterization of mesoscale ocean eddies through the use of horizontal heat diffusion This and other limitations involved with such an ocean model are associated with a number of systematic errors in the simulation (e g , Meehl, 1989) However, the ability to include an explicitly computed ocean heat transport provides an opportunity to study, for the first time, the ocean's dynamical effects on the geographical patterns of CO2-mduced climate change

6.3	Expectations Based on Transient Simulations

The first simulations with these global, coupled GCMs applied to the CO2 problem used the same methodology as that employed in the earlier simple mixed-layer models That is, CO2 was doubled instantaneously and the model run for some time-period to document the climate changes It has been suggested, however, that because of the long thermal response time of the full ocean, and the fact that the warming penetrates downward from the ocean surface into its interior, the traditional concept of a sensitivity experiment to determine a new equilibrium may be less useful with such a coupled system (Schlesinger and Jiang, 1988)

Schlesinger et al (1985) ran a two-level atmospheric model coupled to a 6-layer ocean GCM for 20 years after instantaneously doubling CO2 They noted that the model could not have attained an equilibrium in that period, and went on to document changes in climate at the end of the experiment Washington and Meehl (1989) performed a similar experiment over a 30 year period with instantaneously doubled CO2 in their global spectral atmospheric GCM coupled to a coarse-grid ocean GCM Manabe et al (1990) also used a global spectral atmospheric GCM coupled to a coarse-grid ocean model in an instantaneous CO2 doubling experiment for a 60-year period

These model simulations have been referred to as transient experiments in the sense that the time evolution of the whole climate system for a prescribed 'switch-on' instantaneous CO2 doubling could be examined in a meaningful way

In some respects, all the switch-on coupled GCM experiments agree with the earlier mixed-layei icsults In the Northern Hemisphere, warming is larger at higher latitudes, and there is some evidence, though again mixed of drying in the mid-continental regions in summer Manabe et al (1990) also obtained a wetter soil in middle latitudes in winter In the summer however, Manabe et al (1990) found large areas in the middle latitudes where the

soil was drier However, sector-configuration simulations (Bryan et al , 1988) with a coupled GCM lirst suggested a major difference in the patterns of climate change compared with the earlier mixed-layer model experiments Around Antarctica, a relative warming minimum, al times even a slight cooling, was evident in these simulations

6.4	Expectations Based on Time-Dependent Simulations

The term time-dependent in the present context is taken to mean a model simulation with gradually increasing amounts of greenhouse gases This is what is happening in the real climate system, and such simulations provide us with the first indication of the climate-change signals we may expect in the near future

To date, three such simulations have been published One has been performed with an atmospheric model coupled to a simple ocean with fixed horizontal heat transport (Hansen et al , 1988), and the other two have used atmospheric models coupled to coarse-grid dynamical ocean models, that is, atmosphere-ocean GCMs (Washington and Meehl, 1989, Stouffer et al , 1989) Other studies using coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs are in progress at the UK Meteorological Of lice (Hadley Centre) and the Max Plank Institute fur Meteorologie, Hamburg

6.4.1	Changes In Surface Air Temperature

Hansen et al (1988) performed several simulations with CO2 and other greenhouse gases increasing at various rates, aimed at assessing the detectability of a warming trend above the inherent variability of a coupled oceanatmosphere system The ocean model was a no surprises ocean as described in Section 6 1 2, which simulates the spatially varying heat capacity typical of present climate but precludes feedback to climate change from the ocean currents At any given time the simulated wanning was largest in the continental interior of Asia and at the high latitudes of both hemispheres, though it was first unambiguous in the tropics where the interannual variability is least Contrasting with some othci simulations, regional patterns of climate anomalies also had a tendency to show greater warming in the central and southeast U S , and less warming in the western U S The Antarctic also warmed about as much as coriesponding northern high latitudes, a result that may be sensitive to the assumptions about ocean heat transport in this model

Washington and Meehl (1989) specified a \‘/c per year hncai increase of CO2 in then coupled atmosphere-ocean GCM over a 30-year period and documented changes in the ocean-atmosphere system For this period there was a tendency for the land areas to warm faster than the oceans and foi the warming to be larger in the surface lay ci of the

ocean than below Significant areas of ocean surface temperature increase tended to occur between 50°S and 30°N (Figure 6.1). Warming was smaller and less significant around Antarctica. In the high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere there was no zonally consistent warming pattern, in contrast to the earlier mixed-layer experiments. In fact, there was a cooling in the North Atlantic and Northwest Pacific for the particular five-year period shown in Figure 6.1. Washington and Meehl (1989) show that this cooling was a consequence of alterations in atmospheric and ocean circulation involving changes in precipitation and a weakening of the oceanic thermohaline circulation However, there was a large inter-annual variability at high latitudes in the model, as occurs in nature, and Washington and Meehl pointed out that the pattern for this five-year period was indicative only of coupled anomalies that can occur in the system. Nevertheless, similar patterns of observed climate anomalies have been documented for temperature trends over the past 20-year period in the Northern Hemisphere (Karoly, 1989; Jones et al., 1988).

Stouffer et al. (1989) performed a time-dependent experiment with CO? increasing 1% per year (compounded), and documented geographical patterns of temperature differences for years 61-70. Stouffer et al (1989) show the continents warming faster than the oceans, and a significant warming minimum near 60°S around Antarctica, as was seen in earlier sector experiments (Bryan et al., 1988). As was also seen in the Washington and Meehl results, there was not a uniform pattern of warming at all longitudes at high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere A minimum of warming occurred in the northwestern North Atlantic in association with deep overturning of the ocean. Though the greatest warming occurred at high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, the greater variability there resulted in the warming being unambiguously apparent first in the subtropical ocean regions.

The main similarities in the geographical patterns of CC>2-induced temperature change among these three timedependent experiments are:

(a)

AT99i DJF, transient minus control, (yr 26—30)

(b)

AT991 JJA transient minus control (yr 26—30)

Figure 6.1: Geographical distributions of the surface temperatuie difference, transient minus control, of years 26-30 for (a) DJF and (b) JJA (°C. lowest model layer) Differences significant at 5c/< level are hatched Adapted from Washington and Meehl (1989)

1)	the warming at any given time is less than the corresponding equilibrium value for that instantaneous forcing,

2)	the areas of warming are generally greater at high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere than at low latitudes, but are not zonally uniform in the earlier stages of the time-dependent experiments, and

3)	because of natural variability, statistically significant warming is most evident over the subtropical oceans

The differences between the time-dependent experiment using specified ocean heat transports (Hansen et al , 1988) and the two time dependent experiments with dynamical ocean models (Washington and Meehl, 1989, Stouffer et al, 1989) are

1)	a warming minimum (or slight cooling) around Antarctica in the models with a dynamical ocean precludes the establishment of the large, positive icealbedo feedback that contributes to extensive southern high-latitude warming in the mixed-layer models, and

2)	a warming minimum in the northern North Atlantic

These local minima appear to be due to exchange ot the surface and deep layers of the ocean associated with upwelling as well as downwelling, or with convective overturning The downwelling of surface water in the North Atlantic appears to be susceptible to changes of atmospheric circulation and precipitation and the attendant weakening of the oceanic thermohaline circulation

6.4.2	Changes In Soil Moisture

As indicated in Section 4 5, large-scale precipitation patterns are very sensitive to patterns of sea-surface temperature anomalies Rind et al (1989) link the occurrence of droughts with the climate changes in the timedependent simulations of Hansen et al (1988), and predict increased droughts by the 1990s Washington and Meehl (1989) found in their time-dependent experiment that the soil in mid-latitude continents was wetter in winter and had small changes of both signs in summer These time dependent results are consistent with the results from their respective equilibrium climate change simulations (Section 5) A full analysis of the experiment described in Stouffer et al (1989) is not yet available, but preliminary indications (Manabe, 1990) are that they are similarly consistent, though there may be some small changes in global scale patterns

6.5	An Illustrative Example

In this section, we illustrate the promise and limitations of interactive ocean-atmosphere models with more details of one of the integrations described in Section 6 4 drawing on

Stouffer et al (1989) and additional material supplied by Manabe (1990)

6.5.1	The Experiment

Three 100-year simulations are compared with different radiative forcing, each starting from the same, balanced initial state The concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide is kept constant in a control run In two complementary perturbation runs the concentration ol atmospheric carbon dioxide is increased or decreased by 1% a year (compounded) implying a doubling or halving after 70 years This iate of increase roughly corresponds in terms ol CO? equivalent units to the present rate ol increase of forcing by all the greenhouse gases Since greenhouse warming is proportional to the logarithm ol carbon dioxide concentration (see Section 2, Table 2 2 4 1) an exponential increase gives a linear increase in radiative forcing

To reach the initial balanced state the atmosphenc model is forced to a steady state with the annual mean and seasonal variation of sea surface temperature given by climatological data Using the seasonally varying winds fiom the atmospheric model the ocean is then foiccd to a balanced state with the sea surface temperature and sea surface salinity specified lrom climatological data For models perfectly representing the present climate and assuming the climatological data are accurate the fluxes of heat and moisture should agree exactly In practice the models are less than perfect and the heat and moisture flux fields at the ocean surface have a substantial mismatch

To compensate for this mismatch when the two models are coupled an ad hoc flux adjustment is added to the atmosphenc heat and moisture fluxes This flux ad) ustment which is a fixed function of position and season is precisely the coriection icquired so that as long as the radiative forcing of the atmosphenc model icmains the same the coupled model will iemain balanced and fluctuate around a mean state that includes the obseived sea surface temperature and sea surlace salinity When the radiative balance of the atmospheric model is pciturbed the coupled model is free to seek a new equilibrium because the ad hoc flux adjustments remain as specified and provide no constraint to damp out depaituies fiom the present climate

The flux adjustments in this treatment are nonphysical and disconcertingly large (Manabe 1990) but are simply a symptom of the inadequacies in the separate models and of a mismatch between them Unfoi tunately existing mea surements of ocean surface fluxes are quite inadequate to determine the precise causes This device or its equivalent (eg Sausen et al 1988) is the price that must be paid for a controlled simulation of perturbations from a realistic present day, ocean atmosphere climate Though varying through the annual cycle the pattern of adjustment is the

Figure 6.2: The temporal variation ot the deviation of global mean surface air temperature (°C) of the coupled ocean atmosphere model from its long term average From Manabe (1990), personal communication

same in all three simulations Its direct effects thus disappear when differences are considered, and the conclusions from such experiments should be reasonable provided the differences remain small However, when the simulated ocean circulation or atmospheric state differs greatly from that presently observed, indirect effects are likely to be substantial and too much credence should not be attached to the results There are currently no quantitative criteria for what differences should be regarded as small for this purpose

6.5.2	Results

Before examining the changes due to greenhouse forcing, it is instructive to note the random fluctuations in global

mean surface air temperature within the control run itself (Figure 6 2) These imply a standard deviation in decadal averages of about ±0 08°C, which, though an accurate representation of the model climatology, appears to be somewhat less than what has been observed during the past 100 years (see Section 8) The regional manifestation shown in Figure 6 3 illustrates the uncertainty that is inherent in estimates of time dependent regional climate change ovei 20 year periods

Figure 6 4 shows the difference in 10-year, global average surface air temperature, between the +1% perturbation run and the long term average of the control run, increasing approximately linearly as a function of time After 70 years, the instantaneous temperature is only 58% of the equilibrium value (4°C, see Wetherald and Manabe, 1988) appropriate to the radiative forcing at that time This result compares reasonably well with the estimate of 55% obtained by running the box diffusion model of Section 6 6 with similar scenario of radiative forcing and a climate sensitivity of 4°C for a doubling of CO2 (see Figure 6 7 later) However a result ol both simulations is that the response to a linear increase in forcing with time is also, after a brief initial phase very close to linear in time The time dependent response is thus at all times proportional to the instantaneous forcing, but at a reduced magnitude compared to the equilibrium Close examination of Figures 6 4 and 6 7 show that a straight line fit to the response intersects the time axis at ten years Since lag in the response increases with time it is not a useful parameter to describe results As an alternative, the response is described in terms of a fraction of the equilibrium forcing which corresponds to a time with fixed offset to ten years earlier Thus in the case of Figure 6 4, the fractional response

STANDARD DEVIATION OF 20 YEAR MEAN CONTROL RUN TEMPERATURE

Figure 6.3: The geographic distribution ol the standard deviation of 20 year mean surface air temperatures in the control run From Manabe (1990) personal communication

Figure 6.4: The temporal variation of the difference in globally averaged, decadal mean surface air temperature (°C) between the perturbation run (with 1 % /year increase of atmospheric CO2) and the control run of the coupled ocean-atmosphere model For comparison, the equilibrium response of global mean surface air temperature of the atmosphere mixed layer ocean model to the doubling of atmospheric CO? is also indicated by x symbol at 70th year when the gradually increasing CO? doubles

would be 58%, with a slope of 68%, and an offset of about 10 years A lag of about this magnitude was also noted by Washington and Meehl (1989) for their switch-on CO2 experiment (see their Figure 4)

On a regional scale, a 20-year average centred on 70 years (Figure 6 5(a)) is sufficient to determine general features of climate change that aie significant against the background of natural variability (Figure 6 3) These features may be compaied to the corresponding instantaneous equilibrium (Figure 6 5(b)) As shown in Figuie 6 5(c), which illustrates the ratio ot the values in Figuies 6 5(a) and 6 5(b), the iesponse is in general a relatively constant fraction, 60%	80%, of the equilibnum Major

exceptions to this general picture are the northern Noith Atlantic, and the entire Southern Ocean between 40°S and 60°S, where change is largely suppressed

For the -1% perturbation run, the changes in tempci ature patterns from the control closely mirror those from the + 1% run, for the first 70 years at least but are opposite sign This supports the concept that the depaituie from the present climate can be described as a small pertuibation, and is not inconsistent with the interpietation ot additional heat in the ocean behaving like a passive tracei

6.5.3	Discussion

A qualitative explanation for these model results seems to lie in strong vertical pathways between the surface and intermediate to deep water in the northern North Atlantic and in the Southern Ocean In this coupled oceanatmosphere model, for which the radiative transfer to space is relatively inefficient, downward transfer of additional heat through these pathways short circuits up to 40% of the global greenhouse gas forcing to the deep water, where it mixes into a large volume causing a small local temperature rise Thence it is carried away by deep currents and is sequestered for many centuries As discussed in Section 6 6 below, for a less sensitive atmospheric model the fraction short circuited would be smaller Over time-scales of 10-20 years, the remainder of the greenhouse warming brings the upper few hundred meters of most of the world ocean (the seasonal boundary layer and upper part of permanent thermocline) to approximate local equilibrium The pattern of temperature change resembles that of the equilibrium calculation though with a response commensurate with the reduced effective global forcing, because non-local processes in the atmosphere dominate inter-regional heat translers in the surface layers of the ocean

However, in exceptional regions an additional effect is operating In the northwestern North Atlantic localized deep convection, which is a realistic feature of the model influenced by salinity contrasts, causes a very efficient heat transfer which, every winter effectively pins the nearby ocean surface temperature to that of the deep water below Because ocean currents and atmospheric tiansports act to smooth out the effects the surface tempeiatuic rise of the whole nearby region is greatly reduced In the Southern Hemisphere geochemical tracei studies using the same global ocean model (Toggweiler el al 1989) show that the most important vertical pathway is associated with the very laige, deeply penetrating wind induced downwelling just north of the Antarctic Ctrcumpolai Current and comp ensating upwelling of ..old deep water between theie and the Antaictic continent The effect is likewise to reduce the regional temperature rise from what would otheiwise be the global response

Thus the results described above of coupling this particular ocean and atmosphere GCM aie all qualitatively explicable in terms of additional heat being advected as a passive tracer by the simulated piesent day ocean cnculation in a manner similar to ineit tiansienl tracers such as tritium and CFC s Indeed the results are consistent with a very simple globally averaged model of the ocean, which involves only a single well mixed suiface layci pioviding a lag of about 10 years and a deep layer below of effectively infinite heat capacity though this model is cleaily not unique However this explanation is not universally accepted within the oceanogiaphic

(a) YEARS 60-80 OF TIME-DEPENDENT TEMPERATURE RESPONSE

(c) RATIO OF TIME-DEPENDENT RESPONSE TO EQUILIBRIUM RESPONSE

Figure 6.5: (a) The time-dependent response of surface air temperature (°C) in the coupled ocean-atmosphere model to a 1% yr1 increase of atmospheric CO2. The difference between the 1% yr-1 perturbation run and years 60-80 of the control run when the atmospheric CO2 concentration approximately doubles.is shown (b) The equilibrium response of surface air temperature (°C) in the atmosphere-mixed-layer ocean model to a doubling of atmospheric CO2. (c) The ratio of the time-dependent to equilibrium responses shown above. From Manabe (1990) pers. comm. Also shown in the colour section.

community as an adequate representation of the controlling processes in the real ocean, reflecting the unresolved questions described in Section 6.1.3 about heat storage and the return path of deep water to the surface. Also, from available analyses of the results of Stouffer ct al. (1989) it is not possible to determine what fraction of the heat storage is in truly deep water with time scales of return to the surface of many centuries, as opposed to being in intermediate water with return times to the surface that could be shorter (see Section 6.6.3). Thus extrapolation to other cases should be treated with caution. In particular, the apparent agreement with the results of the upwelling diffusion model may prove to be illusory, particularly if consideration is given to a very different forcing.

6.5.4	Changes In Ocean Circulation

Examination of the long term changes simulated in the model shows some other trends with potentially important consequences. Under the influence of increasing surface temperature and precipitation, the vertical circulation and overturning in the North Atlantic are becoming systematically weaker (Figure 6.6). That this is not an accidental artefact is confirmed by the minus 1% experiment, in which the radiative forcing becomes steadily more negative and this overturning circulation strengthens significantly. The same does not occur in the Antarctic, where the controls on exchanges with the sub-surface waters are different. The indications are, that if the plus 1% experiment were continued to perhaps 150 years, the downwelling and deep convection in the North Atlantic might cease altogether, with climate there and in Western Europe entering a new regime about which it would be premature to speculate. There might also be a significant effect on the carbon cycle and global atmospheric CO2 levels (Section 1.2.7.1).

Though the potential for substantial climate change is implicit in such changes in ocean circulation regime, simulations from present coupled ocean-atmosphere models must be used with considerable caution in making such predictions. Both the parameterization of eddy mixing processes in these models, and the flux adjustment at the ocean-atmosphere interface, have been selected for the present ocean circulation, and cannot be expected to function reliably under drastically different circumstances.

6.6	Projections of Global Mean Change

It is possible to use an energy-balance atmospheric model coupled to an upwelling-diffusion model of the ocean to estimate changes in the global-mean surface air temperature induced by different scenarios of radiative forcing and to help interpret the results from GCMs. Within the limitations of the tracer representation, it summarizes in terms of a few parameters the basic results of more complex simulations of the ocean circulation in time dependent climate change, and enables rapid extrapolation to other cases. As in the case of ocean GCMs, the parameters have been selected to fit geochemical tracer and water mass data and therefore reflect the present state of the world ocean. Therefore, the same caveats must be applied to extrapolating the results of the upwelling diffusion models to very different climatic regimes.

6.6.1	An Upwelling Diffusion Model

Such a simple climatc/ocean model was proposed by Hoffert et al. (1980) and has since been used in several studies of the time-dependent response of the climate system to greenhouse-gas-induced radiative forcing [see, for example, Harvey and Schneider (1985); Wigley and Raper (1987), and the review papers by Hoffert and

Latitude	Latitude

Figure 6.6: The streamfunction describing the vertical circulation in the Atlantic after 100 years: (a) control; (b) increasing forcing. Units are 106m3s-1. From Stouffer et al. (1989).

Flannery (1985) and Schlesinger (1989)] This simple climate model determines the global-mean surface temperature of the atmosphere and the temperature of the ocean as a 1 unction of depth from the surface to the ocean floor It is assumed that the atmosphere mixes heat efficiently between latitudes, so that a single temperature rise AT characterizes the surface of the globe, and that the incremental radiation to space associated with the response to greenhouse gas forcing is proportional to AT The model ocean is subdivided vertically into layers, with the uppermost being the mixed layer Also, the ocean is subdivided horizontally into a small polar region where water downwells and bottom water is formed, and a much larger nonpolar region where theie is a slow uniform vertical upwelling In the nonpolai region heat is transported upwards toward the surface by the water upwelling theie and downwards by physical processes whose bulk effects are treated as an equivalent diffusion Besides by radiation to space, heat is also removed from the mixed layer in the nonpolar region by a transport to the polar region and downwelling toward the bottom, this heat being ultimately transported upward from the ocean floor in the nonpolar region

In the simple climate/ocean model, five principal quantities must be specified

1)	the temperature sensitivity of the climate system, AT2x characterized by the equilibrium warming induced by a CO2 doubling,

2)	the vertical profile of the vertical velocity of the ocean in the non-polar region, n,

3)	the vertical profile of thermal diffusivity in the ocean, k, by which the vertical transfer of heat by physical processes other than large-scale vertical motion is 1 epresented,

4)	the depth of the well-mixed, upper layer of the ocean, li, and

5)	the change in downwelled sea surface temperature in the polar region relative to that in the nonpolar region, n

For the following simulations the paiameteis aie those selected by Hoffeit et al , 1980, in their original piesentation ol the model Globally averaged upwelling, m , outside of water mass source regions is taken as 4 m/yr which is the equivalent of 42 x lO^m^s’l of deep and inteimediate water formation from all sources Based upon an e-lolding scale depth of the averaged thermocline of 500m (Levitus, 1982), the coriesponding A is 0 63 cm2 S-1 li is taken to be 70 m, the approximate globally averaged depth ot the mixed layei (Manabe and Stouffei 1980) Lastly, two values are consideied tor n namely 1 and 0 the former based on the assumption that the additional heat in surface water that is advected into high latitudes and downwells in regions of deep watei formation is

8		
7		
6	-	
5	-	
°C 4		
	Equilibrium —*■/	
3	- /	— Response
2		
1	- /	
0	I	1	1

5° r> u,	1°° V	150

Doubling	Years

time

Figure 6.7: The change in surface temperature for a linear increase in greenhouse gas forcing, with an equivalent CO2 doubling time of 70 years The simulations were performed with an energy balance/upwelling diffusion ocean model with AT2X = 4°C, an upwelling velocity u of 4 m yl, a mixed layer depth h of 70 m a vertical diffusivity A of 0 66 cm2 $-1, dncj a K parameter of 1

transported down rather than rejected to the atmosphere, and the latter on the alternate assumption that the polar ocean temperature remains at the freezing temperature for sea water and therefore does not change For the latter case to be applicable, the atmosphere would have to accept the additional heat, presumably meaning that the surrounding ocean surface temperature would have to be relatively substantially warmei than elsewhere at that latitude

Selecting n = 1, these values of the parameters are used for best judgement estimates ot global warming in Sections 8 and 9 The choice is somewhat arbitrary, but the impact of uncertainty must be judged against the sensitivity ol the conclusions to then values

6.6.2	Model Results

Figuie 6 7 shows the simulated increase in global mean temperature foi the radiative forcing function used by Stouffer et al (1989), with the appropriate atmospheric sensitivity AT2x equal to 4°C for a doubling of CCh and a n factor of 1 Since the ocean parameters used were chosen independently as standaid for best estimate simulations in Sections 7 and 8, the general correspondence with Figure 6 4 piovides some encouragement that this simplified

Figure 6.8: As for Figure 6 7 for a 7t parameter of 1 but for various values of atmospheric climate sensitivity ATj*

model is consistent with the ocean GCM Note, however, the slight upward curvature of the response tn Figure 6 7, due to intermediate time scales of 20-100 years associated with heat diffusion or ventilation in the thermocline A tangent line fit at the 70 year mark could be described as a fractional response that is approximately 55% of the instantaneous forcing, with a slope of 66% superimposed on an offset of about 11 years For the sense in which the terms percentage response and lag are used here see Section 6 5 2

Figure 6 8 shows the simulated inciease in global mean temperature for the same radiative forcing but with atmospheric models of differing climate sensitivity For a sensitivity of 1 5°C for a doubling of CO2 the response fraction defined by the tangent line at 70 years is approximately 77% ol the instantaneous lorcing with a slope of 85% supci imposed on an offset of 6 years whereas for 4 5°C the concsponding values arc 52% 63% and 12 years

Figure 6 9 compaies the response for the standard parameter values with those for a 7t lactor oi zcio and lot a purely diffusive model with the same diffusivity

Varying h between 50 and 120 m makes very little diflerence to changes over several decades The effect of varying k between 0 5 and 2 0 cm2 s 1 wnh historical forcing has been discussed by Wigley and Raper (1990) If k/w is held constant, the realized warming varies over this range by about 18% for AT2X = 4 5°C and bv 8% for AT2x = 1 5°C

Figure 6 10 shows the effect of terminating the incieasc of forcing after 70 years The response with 7t = 1 continues to giow to a value coriesponding to an oil set ol some 10

time

Figure 6.9: As for Figure 6 7 but for w = 4, n = 1 (corresponding to Response curve in Figure 6 7), w = 4 n = 0, and w = 0 (dashed curve) Figure 6 7 shows the equilibrium case

Figure 6.10: As for Figure 6 7 but for a forcing rising linearly with time until an equivalent CO2 doubling after 70 years followed by a constant forcing

20 years, then rises very much more slowly to come to true equilibrium only after many centuries

Also shown (Figure 6 11) are projections of future climate change using radiative forcing from IPCC Business-as-Usual and B-D emission scenarios, for values of the climate sensitivity AT2x equal to 1 5, 2 5 and 4 5°C These scenarios are discussed in the Annex Assuming k = 0 63	- 1 and w = 4 ms ' the realised wanning is 1 3

1 8 and 2 6°C (above pre-industual temperatuics) undei the Business as Usual Scenario For Scenario B these estimates should be reduced by about 15%

Realised Temperature Rise	Realised Temperature Rise	Realised Temperature Rise

Year

Year

Year

6.6.3	Discussion

The model used for these piojections is highly simplified, and somewhat different choices could be made of the parameters while still retaining consistency with the observed average thermocline depth and accepted rates of global deep water formation However, the impact ot these residual uncertainties on the time-dependent global mean climate response is relatively small compared to that associated with the cloud-radiation feedback (Figure 6 8) Similar models have also been widely used in interpreting the observed distribution of geochemical tracers in the ocean and for modelling the uptake of CO2 As discussed in Section 6 1, the detailed physical basis for a model of this type may be questioned, but it yields global average results that are apparently not inconsistent with simulations using more detailed coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs (Bryan et al , 1984, Schlesinger et al , 1985) Given the limited speed of supercomputers available in 1990, it remains the only tool available for exploring timedependent solutions for a wide range of forcing scenarios Thus it is important to appreciate the basic reasons the model gives the results it does

The increased percentage response for low climate sensitivities shown in Figure 6 8 is a broadly applicable consequence ot the distribution of the prescribed forcing into the parallel processes of radiation to space and increasing storage in the ocean Treating heat in the ocean as a passive tracer, for each process the heat flux at any given time is proportional to the lealized temperature rise However, for radiation the constant of proportionality is inversely proportional to the climate sensitivity, whereas for storage the constant is independent of it Since both fluxes are positive, and must add to a fixed value, the lorcing, decreasing the climate sensitivity will increase the percentage response (though the realized temperature rise will increase) This conclusion, though not the storage proportionality constant, is unaffected by changing the formulation of the storage mechanism in the ocean, provided only it can be modelled by a passive tracer

The difference between each curve in Figure 6 9 and that for the equilibrium value at the corresponding time is proportional to the rate ol increase of heat stored in the oceans, and the area between the curves to the cumulative

figure 6.11: The contribution of the change in greenhouse gas conccntiations to the change in global-mean surface air temp erature (°C) during 1875 to 1985 together with projections from 1985 to 2100 for IPCC Scenarios Ball-D The temperature rise is from 1765 (pre-industnal) The simulation was performed with an energy balance chmate/upwelhng diffusion ocean model with an upwelling velocity >1 ot 4 m y-' mixed layer depth h of 70 m vertical diffusivity k of 0 66 cm2 s 1 and a it patameter of 1 The thiee diagrams are foi ATzx-values of (a) 4 5 C (b) 2 5 C and (c) 1 5 C The equilibrium tempeiature is also shown tor the BaU emissions and 2 5°C climate sensitivity

storage Compared to pure diffusion (m = 0), this storage is increased by upwelling, provided the additional heat that is added, as water rising through the thermocline is bi ought to ever higher temperatures at the ocean surface, is then retained in the ocean (tc = 1) If, on the other hand, that heat is lost to the atmosphere before the surface watei in high latitudes downwells (k = 0) then the ocean heat storage is reduced, presumably because, once heated, a given parcel of water can retain that heat only for a finite time as the entire volume ol the thermocline is recycled into the deep ocean in 150 years or so After correcting foi diflerent

surface temperatures, the difference between these two curves measures for the case tt = I the effective stoiage in the deep ocean below the thermocline, where the recirculation time to the surface is many centuries The difference between 7t = 0 and the equilibrium, on the othei hand, measures the retention in the surface layers and the thermocline Though the latter aica is substantially larger than the former, it does not mean that all the heat concerned is immediately available to sustain a surface temperature rise

Figure 6 10 shows that within this model with n = 1, if the increase in forcing ceases abruptly after 70 years, only 40% of the then unrealized global surface tempeiature increase is realized within the next 100 years, and most ol that occurs in the first 20 years If there is no heat storage in the deep ocean this percentage is substantially higher

It is thus apparent that the interpretation given in Section 6 5 3 of the results of Stouffer et al (1989) in terms of a two-layer box model is not unique However, it is reassuring that broadly similar results emerge from an upwelling-diffusion model Nevertheless, it is clear that further coupled GCM simulations, different analyses of experiments already completed, and, above all, more definitive observations will be necessary to resolve these issues

6.7	Conclusions

Coupled ocean atmosphere general circulation models, though still of coarse resolution and subject to technical problems such as the flux adjustment are providing useful insights into the expected climate response due to a timedependent radiative forcing However, only a very few simulations have been completed at this time and to explore the range of scenarios necessary for this assessment highly simplified upwelling-diffusion models of the ocean must be used instead

In response to a forcing that is steadily increasing with time, the simulated global use of temperatuie in both types of model is approximately a constant Faction of the equilibrium rise conesponding to the forcing at an earlier time For an atmosphenc model with a tempeiatuie sensitivity of 4°C foi a doubling of CCh this constant is appioximately 66% with an offset of 1 1 years For a sensitivity of 1 5°C, the values aie about 85% and 6 years respectively Changing the paiameteis in the upwelling diifusion model within ranges supposedly consistent with the global distribution of geophysical traceis can change the response fraction by up to 20% for the most sensitive atmospheric models but by only 10% foi the least sensitive

Indications from the upwelling diffusion model are that if after a steady use the forcing weie to be held steady the response would continue to inciease at about the same rate for 10 20 years, but theieaftei would incicasc only much

more slowly taking several centuries to achieve equilibnum This conclusion depends mostly on the assumption that n = 1, i e , greenhouse wanning in surface waters is transported downwards in high latitudes by downwelling or exchange with deep water rather than being rejected to the atmosphere, and is thereafter sequestered for many centuries Heat storage in the thermocline affects the surface temperature on all timescales, to some extent even a century or more later

There is no conclusive analysis of the relative role of diffeient water masses in ocean heat storage foi the GCM of Stouffer et al (1990), but there are significant transfeis of heat into volumes of intermediate and deep water from which the return time to the surface is many centuries Furthei analysis is required of the implications foi tracer distributions of the existing simulations ol the cnculation m the control run, for comparison with the upwelling diffusion model Likewise, further simulations ol the fully interactive coupled GCM with different forcing functions would strengthen confidence in the use of the simplified tracer representation for studies of neat teim climate change

A sudden change of forcing induces tiansient contrasts in surface temperature between land and ocean areas affecting the distribution of precipitation Nevertheless the regional response pattern for both temperature and precipitation of coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs tor a steadily increasing forcing generally resembles that foi an equilibrium simulation except uniformly reduced in magnitude Howevei, both such models with an active ocean show an anomalously large reduction in the use of surface temperature around Antarctica and one shows a similai reduction in the noithern Noith Atlantic These anomalous regions aie associated with iapid vertical exchanges within the ocean due to convective oveiturning oi wind driven upwelling downwelling

Coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs demonstiate an inherent interannual vailability, with a significant fraction on decadal and longer timescales It is not clear hove realistic current simulations of the statistics of this variability really are At a given time warming due to gieenhouse gas forcing is largest in high latitudes of the northern hemisphere, but because the natuial vailability is greatei there, the warming first becomes cleatly apparent in the tropics

The major sources of unceilainty in these conclusions arise from inadequate observations to document how the piesent ocean circulation really functions Even fully intei active GCMs need mixing parameters that must be adjusted ad hoi to fit the real ocean and onl> when the processes controlling such mixing aie fully understood and icflected in the models can there be confidence in climate simulations under conditions substantially difIcient from the present day There is an urgent need to establish an

operational system to collect oceanographic observations routinely at sites all around the world ocean,

Present coarse resolution coupled ocean-atmosphere general circulation models are yielding results that are broadly consistent with existing understanding of the general circulation of the ocean and of the atmospheric climate system With increasing computer power and improved data and understanding based upon planned ocean observation programs, it may well be possible within the next decade to resolve the most serious of the remaining technical issues and achieve more realistic simulations of the time-dependent coupled oceanatmosphere system responding to a variety of greenhouse forcing scenarios Meanwhile, useful estimates of global warming under a variety of different forcing scenarios may be made using highly simplified upwelling-diffusion models of the ocean, and with tracer simulations using GCM reconstructions of the existing ocean circulation

References

Bryan, K , F G Komro, S Manabe and M J Spelman, 1982 Transient climate response to increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide Science, 215, 56-58

Bryan, K , F G Komro, and C Rooth, 1984 The ocean's transient response to global surface anomalies In Climate Pi ocesses and Climate Sensitivity, Geophys Monogr Ser , 29 , J E Hansen and T Takahashi (eds ), Amer Geophys Union Washington, D C , 29-38

Bryan, K, S Manabe, and M J Spelman, 1988 Interhemispheric asymmetry in the transient response of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to a CO? forcing J Pin s Oc c anogi , 18, 851 867

Harvey LDD and S H Schneider 1985 Transient climate response to external forcing on 10()	1(H year time scales /

Geophys Rev, 90, 2191 2222

Hansen, J , 1 Fung, A Lacis, D Rind, S Lebedeff, R Ruedy, G Russell and P Stone, 1988 Global climate changes as forecast by the Goddard Institute lor Space Sciences three dimensional model 1 Geophys Re s 93,9341 9364

Hoffert, M 1 and B F Flannery 1985 Model projections of the time-dependent response to increasing carbon dioxide In Piojcctmg the Climatic Effects of hu leasing Cai bon Dioxide DOE/ER-0237, edited by M C MacCracken and F M Luther, United Stated Department of Energy, Washington, DC, pp 149 190

Hoffert, M I, A J Callegari, and C-T Hsieh, 1980 The role of deep sea heat storage in the secular response to climatic forcing J Geophys Res , 85 (Cl 1), 6667-6679

Jones P D T M L Wigley C K Folland and D E Parker, 1988 Spatial patterns in recent worldwide temperature trends Climate Momtoi 16 175 186

Karolv D 1989 Northern hemisphere temperature trends A possible greenhouse gas effect ’ Geophys Res Lett 16 465 468

Levitus, S 1982 Climatological Atlas of the World Ocean, NOAA Prof Papers, 13, U S Dept of Commerce, Washington DC, 17311

Manabe S , and R J Stouffer, 1980 Sensitivity of a global climate model to an increase of CO2 concentration in the atmosphere J Geophys Res , 85, 5529-5554

Manabe, S K Bryan, and M J Spelman, 1990 Transient response of a global ocean-atmosphere model to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide J Phvs Oceanogi , To be published

Manabe S 1990 Private communication

Meehl, G A , and W M Washington, 1988 A comparison of soil-moisture sensitivity in two global climate models J Atmos Sc 1 45,1476 1492

Meehl, G A , 1989 The coupled ocean-atmosphere modeling problem in the tropical Pacific and Asian monsoon regions J Clim, 2, 1146-1163

Rind, D , R Goldberg J Hansen, C Rosenzweig, and R Ruedy, 1989 Potential evapotranspiration and the likelihood of future drought J Geophys Res, in press

Sausen, R , K Barthel, and K Hasselmann, 1988 Coupled ocean atmosphere models with flux correction Chm Dyns, 2, 145-163

Semtner, A J and R M Chervin, 1988 A simulation of the global ocean circulation with resolved eddies J Geophys Res, 93, 15502 15522

Schlesinger M E 1989 Model projections of the climate changes induced by increased atmospheric CO2 In Climate and the Geo Sciences A Challenge foi Science and Society in the 21 st Centuiy, A Berger, S Schneider, and J C Duplessy, Eds , Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 375-415

Schlesinger, M E and X Jiang, 1988 The transport of CO2-mduced warming into the ocean An analysis of simulations by the OSU coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation model Chm Dy 11,3, 1 17

Schlesinger M E and J F B Mitchell, 1987 Climate model simulations of the equilibrium climatic response to increased carbon dioxide Res Geophys 25,760 798

Schlesinger, MEWL Gates and Y -J Han, 1985 The role of the ocean in CCH induced climate change Preliminary results from the OSU coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation model In Coupled Ocean Atmospheie Models, J C J Nihoul (ed), Elsevier Oceanography Series, 40, 447-478 Stouffer, R J S Manabe and K Bryan, 1989 Interhemispheric asymmetry in climate response to a gradual increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide Native, 342, 660-662

Toggweiler, J R,K Dixon and K Bryan, 1988 Simulations of Radiocarbon in a Coarse Resolution, World Ocean Model II Distributions of Bomb produced Carbon-14 J Geophys Res , 94(C10), 8243-8264

Washington, W M , and G A Meehl, 1989 Climate sensitivity due to increased CO2 Experiments with a coupled atmosphere and ocean general circulation model Chm Dyn , 4, 1 38

Wetherald, RT and S Manabe, 1988 Cloud feedback processes in general circulation models J Atmos Sc 1 45(8), 1397 1415

Wigley, T M L , and S C B Raper, 1987 Thermal expansion of sea water associated with global warming Native, 330, 127131

Wigley, T. M. L., and S.C.B. Raper, 1989: Future changes in global-mean temperature and thermal-expansion-related sea level rise. In "Climate and Sea Level Change: Observations, Projections and Implications", (eds R. A. Warrick and T. M. L. Wigley) To be published.

Woods, J.D., 1984: Physics of thermocline ventilation. In: Coupled ocean-atmosphere circulation models. Ed. J.C.J. Nihoul, Elsevier.

7

Observed Climate Variations and Change

C.K. FOLLAND, T.R. KARL, K.YA. VINNIKOV

Contributors:

J.K. Angell; P. Arkin; R.G. Barry; R. Bradley; D.L. Cadet; M. Chelliah; M. Coughlan;

B.	Dahlstrom; H.F. Diaz; H Flohn; C. Fu; P. Groisman; A. Gruber; S. Hastenrath;

A.	Henderson-Sellers; K. Higuchi; P.D. Jones; J. Knox; G. Kukla; S. Levitus; X. Lin; N. Nicholls; B.S. Nyenzi; J.S. Oguntoyinbo; G.B. Pant; D.E. Parker; B. Pittock;

R. Reynolds; C.F. Ropelewski; C.D. Schonwiese; B. Sevruk; A. Solow; K.E. Trenberth; P. Wadhams; W.C. Wang; S. Woodruff; T. Yasunari; Z. Zeng; and X. Zhou.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary	199

7.1	Introduction	201

7.2	Palaeo-Climatic Variations and Change	201

7.2.1	Climate of the Past	5,000,000 Years	201

7.2.2	Palaeo-climate Analogues for Three Warm

Epochs	203

7.2.2.1	Pliocene climatic optimum (3,000,000 to

4,300,000 BP)	203

7.2.2.2	Eemian interglacial optimum (125,000 to

130,000 years BP)	204

7.2.2.3	Climate of the Holocene optimum (5000 to

6000 years BP)	204

7.6 Tropospheric Variations and Change	220
7.6.1 Temperature	220
7.6.2 Comparisons of Recent Tropospheric and	
Surface Temperature Data	222
7.6.3 Moisture	222
7.7 Sub-Surface Ocean Temperature and Salinity	
Variations	222
7.8 Variations and Changes in the Cryosphere	223
7.8.1 Snow Cover	223
7.8.2 Sea Ice Extent and Thickness	224
7.8.3 Land Ice (Mountain Glaciers)	225
7.8.4 Permafrost	225

7.3	The Modern Instrumental Record	206

7.4	Surface Temperature Variations and Change	207

7.4.1	Hemispheric and Global	207

7.4.1.1	Land	207

7.4.1.2	Sea	209

7.4.1.3	Land and sea combined	212

7.4.2	Regional, Seasonal and Diurnal Space and

Timescales	214

7.4.2.1	Land and sea	214

7.9	Variations and Changes in Atmospheric

Circulation	225

7.9.1	El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Influences 226

7.9.2	The North Atlantic	228

7.9.3	The North Pacific	229

7.9.4	Southern Hemisphere	229

7.10	Cloudiness	230

7.10.1	Cloudiness Over Land	230

7.10.2	Cloudiness Over the Oceans	230

7.4.2.2	Seasonal variations and changes	217

7.4.2.3	Day-time and night-time	217

7.5	Precipitation and Evaporation Variations and

Changes	218

7.5.1	Precipitation Over Land	218

7.5.2	Rainfall Over the Oceans	220

7.5.3	Evaporation from the Ocean Surface	220

7.11 Changes of Climate Variability and Climatic

Extremes	230
7.11.1 Temperature	231
7.11.2 Droughts and Floods	232
7.11.3 Tropical Cyclones	232
7.11.4 Temporales of Central America	232
7.12 Conclusions	233
References	233

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

***** There has been a real, but irregular, increase of global surface temperature since the late nineteenth century.

***** There has been a marked, but irregular, recession of the majority of mountain glaciers over the same period.

***** Precipitation has varied greatly in sub-Saharan Africa on time scales of decades.

*** Precipitation has progressively increased in the Soviet Union over the last century.

*** A steady increase of cloudiness of a few percent has been observed since 1950 over the USA.

* A larger, more sudden, but less certain increase of cloudiness has been observed over Australia.

Observational and palaeo-climatic evidence indicates that the Earth's climate has varied in the past on time scales ranging from many millions of years down to a few years. Over the last two million years, glacial-interglacial cycles have occurred on a time scale of 100,000 years, with large changes in ice volume and sea level. During this time, average global surface temperatures appear to have varied by about 5-7°C. Since the end of the last ice age, about 10,000 BP, globally averaged surface temperatures have fluctuated over a range of up to 2°C on time scales of centuries or more. Such fluctuations include the Holocene Optimum around 5,000-6,000 years ago. the shorter Medieval Warm Period around 1000 AD (which may not have been global) and the Little Ice Age which ended only in the middle to late nineteenth century. Details are often poorly known because palaeo-climatic data are frequently sparse.

The instrumental record of surface temperatures over the land and oceans remains sparse until after the middle of the nineteenth century. It is common, therefore, to emphasize trends in the global instrumental record from the late nineteenth century. The record suggests a global (combined land and ocean) average warming of 0.45±0.15°C since the late nineteenth century, with an estimated small (less than 0.05°C) exaggeration due to urbanisation in the land component. The greater part of the global temperature increase was measured prior to the mid-1940s. Global warming is indicated by three independent data sets: an tempeiatures over land, air temperatures over the ocean, and sea surface temperatures. The latter two data sets show only a small lag compared with land temperatures. A marked retieat oi mountain glaciers in all parts of the world since the end ot the nineteenth century provides further evidence ol warming.

The temperature record of the last 100 years shows significant differences in behaviour between the Northern and Southern

Hemispheres. A cooling of the Northern Hemisphere occurred between the 1940s and the early 1970s, while Southern Hemisphere temperatures remained nearly constant from the 1940s to about 1970. Since 1970 in the Southern Hemisphere and 1975 in the Northern Hemisphere, a more general warming has been observed, concentrated into the period 1975-1982, with little global warming between 1982 and 1989. However, changes of surface temperature in different regions of the two hemispheres have shown considerable contrasts for periods as long as decades throughout the last century, notably in the Northern Hemisphere

Over periods as short as a few years, fluctuations ol global or hemispheric temperatures of a few tenths ot a degree are common. Some of these are related to the El Nino-Southern Oscillation phenomenon in the tropical Pacific. Evidence is also emerging of decadal time scale variability of ocean circulation and deep ocean heat content that is likely to be an important factor in climate change.

It is not yet possible to deduce changes in precipitation on global or even hemispheric scales. Some regions have, however, experienced real changes over the past few decades. A large decline in summer seasonal rainfall has been observed in subSaharan Africa since the 1950s but precipitation appears to have increased progressively over the Soviet Union during the last century.

Reliable records of sea-ice and snow are too short to discern long-term changes. Systematic changes in the number and intensity of tropical cyclones are not apparent, though fluctuations may occur on decadal time scales. There is no evidence yet of global scale changes in the frequency of extreme tempeiatures Increases in cloud cover have been reported from the oceans and some land areas Uncertainties in these records are mostly too large to allow firm conclusions to be drawn Some of the changes are artificial, but increases of cloudiness over the USA and Australia over the last forty years may be real.

We conclude that despite great limitations in the quantity and quality of the available historical temperature data, the evidence points consistently to a real but irregular warming over the last century. A global warming of larger size has almost certainly occurred at least once since the end of the last glaciation without any appicciable increase in greenhouse gases. Because we do not understand the reasons for these past warming events it is not yet possible to attribute a specific proportion of the recent, smaller, warming to an increase of greenhouse gases.

7.1	Introduction

This Section focuses on changes and variations in the modern climate record To gain a longer term perspective and to provide a background to the discussion ol the palaeo-analogue forecasting technique in Section 3, variations in palaeo-chmate are also described Analyses of the climate record can provide important information about natural climate variations and variability A major difficulty in using observed records to make deductions about changes resulting from recent increases in greenhouse gases (Sections 1 and 2) is the existence of natural climatic forcing factors that may add to, or subtract from, such changes Unforced internal variability of the climate system will also occur further obscuring any signal induced by greenhouse gases

Observing the weather, and converting weather data to information about climate and climate change is a very complex endeavour Virtually all our information about modern climate has been derived from measurements which were designed to monitor weather rather than climate change Even greatei difficulties arise with the proxy data (natural lecords of climate sensitive phenomena, mainly pollen remains, lake varves and ocean sediments, insect and animal lemains glacier termini) which must be used to deduce the chaiactenstics of climate before the modern instrumental period began So special attention is given to a critical discussion of the quality of the data on climate change and vailability and our confidence in making deductions from these data Note that we have not made much use of several kinds of proxy data, for example tree ring data, that can provide information on climate change over the last millennium We recognise that these data have an increasing potential howevei their indications are not yet sufficiently easy to assess nor sufficiently integrated with indications from other data to be used in this report

A brief discussion of the basic concepts of climate climate change, climate trends etc togethei with references to material containing more precise definitions of terms, is found in the Introduction at the beginning of this Repoit

7.2	Palaeo-Climatic Variations and Change

7.2.1	Climate Of The Past 5,000,000 Years

Climate varies naturally on all time scales from hundreds of millions of years to a few years Prominent in recent Earth's history have been the 100,000 year Pleistocene glacial-interglacial cycles when climate was mostly cooler than at present (Imbne and Intbrie 1979) This period began about 2,000,000 yeais before the piescnt time (BP) and was preceded by a wanner epoch having only limited glaciation, mainly over Antarctica called the Pliocene Global surface temperatures have typically vaned b_\ 5-7 C

through the Pleistocene ice age cycles with large changes in ice volume and sea level, and temperature variations as great as 10-15°C in some middle and high latitude regions of the Northern Hemisphere Since the beginning of the current interglacial epoch about 10 000 BP global temperatures have fluctuated within a much smaller range Some fluctuations have nevertheless lasted several centuries, including the Little Ice Age which ended in the nineteenth century and which was global in extent

Proxy data clearly indicate that the Earth emerged from the last ice age 10,000 to 15,000 BP (Figure 7 1) During this glacial period continental size ice sheets covered much of North America and Scandinavia and world sea level was about 120m below present values An important cause of the recurring glaciations is believed to be variations in seasonal radiation receipts in the Northein Hemisphere These variations arc due to small changes in the distance of the Earth from the sun in given seasons and slow changes in the angle of the tilt of the Earths axis which affects the amplitude of the seasonal insolation These Milankovitch orbital effects (Berger, 1980) appear to be correlated with the glacial-interglacial cycle since glacials arise when solar radiation is least in the extratiopical Northern Hemisphere summer

Variations in carbon dioxide and methane in ice age cycles aie also very important factors, they served to modify and perhaps amplify the other forcing effects (sec Section 1) However, there is evidence that rapid changes in climate have occurred on time scales of about a century which cannot be directly related to orbital foicing oi to changes in atmospheric composition The most diamatic ol these events was the Youngei Diyas cold episode which involved an abrupt reversal of the general warming trend in progiess aiound 10 500 BP as the last episode of continental glaciation came to a close The Youngei Dryas was an event of global significance it was cleaily observed in New Zealand (Salingci 1989) though its influence may not have extended to all parts oi the globe (Rind ct al 1986) There is as yet no consensus on the reasons lor this climatic reversal which lasted about 500 years and ended vciy suddenly However because the signal was strongest around the North Atlantic Ocean suggestions have been made that the climatic reversal had its physical origin in large changes in the sea surface temperature (SST) oi the North Atlantic Ocean One possibility is that the cooling may have resulted from reduced deep watci pioduclion in the Noith Atlantic following large scale melting of the Lauientide Ice sheet and the lcsulting influx ol huge amounts of low density freshwater into the northein Noith Atlantic ocean (Broeckcr et al 1985) Consequential changes in the global oceanic circulation may have occuned (Sticet Penott and Pcrrott 1990) which maj ha\c nnolxed vanations in the strength of the thcimohaline

cnculation in the Atlantic This closed oceanic cnculation involves northward How of water near the ocean surface sinking in the sub-Arctic and a return flow at depth The relevance of the Younger Dryas to today s conditions is that it is possible that changes in the theimohahne circulation of a qualitatively similar character might occur quite quickly dunng a warming of the climate induced by greenhouse gases A possible trigger might be an increase of precipitation over the extiatropical Noith Atlantic (Broeckcr, 1987), though the changes in ocean circulation are most likely to be considerably smallei than in the Younger Dryas Section 6 gives further details

The period since the end of the last glaciation has been characterized by small changes in global average temperature with a range of probably less than 2°C (Figure 7 1), though it is still not clear whethci all the fluctuations indicated were truly global However, large regional

Figure 7.1: Schematic diagrams of global temperature variations since the Pleistocene on three time scales (a) the last million years (b) the last ten thousand years and (c) the last thousand years The dotted line nominally represents conditions near the beginning of the twentieth century

changes in hydrological conditions have occurred, particularly in the tropics Wetter conditions in the Sahara from 12 000 to 4,000 yeais BP enabled cultural groups to survive by hunting and fishing in what are today almost the most arid regions on Earth During this time Lake Chad expanded to become as large as the Caspian Sea is today (several hundred thousand knA Grove and Warren, 1968) Drier conditions became established after 4,000 BP and many former lake basins became completely dry (Street-Perrot and Harnson 1985) Pollen sequences from lake beds of northwest India suggest that periods with subdued monsoon activity existed during the recent glacial maximum (Singh ct al 1974) but the epoch 8,000 to 2,500 BP experienced a humid climate with frequent floods

There is glowing evidence that worldwide temperatures wcie highei than at piesent during the mid-Holocene (especially 5 000-6 000 BP), at least in summer, though carbon dioxide levels appear to have been quite similar to those of the pre-mdustnal era at this time (Section 11 Thus parts <si western Euiope China, Japan, the eastern USA were a few degrees warmer in July during the midHolocene than in recent decades (Yoshino and Urushibara, 1978, Webb et al 1987, Huntley and Prentice, 1988, Zhang and Wang 1990) Parts of Australasia and Chile were also waimei The late tenth to early thirteenth centuries (about AD 950-1250) appear to have been exceptionally warm in western Europe, Iceland and Greenland (Alexandre 1987, Lamb, 1988) This period is known as the Medieval Climatic Optimum China was, however, cold at this time (mainly in winter) but South Japan was warm (Yoshino, 1978) This period of widespread warmth is notable in that there is no evidence that it was accompanied by an increase of greenhouse gases

Cooler episodes have been associated with glacial advances in alpine regions of the world, such neo-glacial' episodes have been increasingly common in the last few thousand years Of particulai interest is the most recent cold event, the Little Ice Age , which resulted in extensive glacial advances in almost all alpine regions of the world between 150 and 450 years ago (Grove, 1988) so that glaciers were more extensive 100-200 years ago than now nearly everywhere (Figure 7 2) Although not a period of continuously cold climate, the Little Ice Age was probably the coolest and most globally extensive cool period since the Younger Dryas In a few regions, alpine glaciers advanced down-valley even further than during the last glaciation (for example, Miller, 1976) Some have argued that an increase in explosive volcanism was responsible for the coolness (for example Hammer, 1977, Porter, 1986), others claim a connection between glacier advances and reductions in solar activity (Wigley and Kelly, 1989) such as the Maunder and Sporer solar activity minima (Eddy, 1976), but see also Pittock (1983) At present, there is no

Figure 7.2: Worldwide glacier termini fluctuations over the last three centuries (after Grove, 1988, and other sources)

agreed explanation for these recurrent cooler episodes The Little Ice Age came to an end only in the nineteenth century Thus some of the global warming since 1850 could be a recovery from the Little Ice Age rather than a direct result of human activities So it is important to recognise that natural variations of climate are appreciable and will modulate any future changes induced by man

7.2.2	Palaeo-Climate Analogues from Three Warm Epochs

Thiee periods from the past have been suggested by Budyko and Izrael (1987) as analogues of a future warm climate For the second and third periods listed below, however, it can be argued that the changed seasonal distribution of incoming solar radiation existing at those times may not necessarily have produced the same climate as would tesult from a globally-averaged increase in greenhouse gases

1)	The climate optimum of the Pliocene (about 3.300,000 to 4,300,000 years BP)

2)	The Eemian interglacial optimum (125,000 to 130,000 years BP),

3)	The mid-Holocenc (5,000 to 6,000 years BP)

Note that the word optimum" is used here for convenience and is taken to imply a warm climate However such a climate may not be "optimal" in all senses

7 2 2 1 Pliocene climatic optimum (about 3,300,000 to 4,300,000 BP)

Reconstructions of summer and winter mean temperatures and total annual precipitation have been made for this

pcnod by scientists in the USSR Many types of proxy data weic used to develop temperature and precipitation patterns over the land masses of the Northern Hemisphere (Budyko and 1/rael 1987) Over the oceans, the mam sources of information were cores drilled in the bed of the deep ocean by the American Deep sea Ocean Core Drilling Project Some of these reconstructions are shown in Figure 7 3a and b

Figure 7 3a suggests that mid-latitude Northern Hemisphere summer temperatures averaged about 3-4°C higher than present-day values Atmospheric concentrations of caibon dioxide arc estimated by Budyko et al (1985) to have been near 600 ppm, i e twice as large as immediately pre industrial values Howevei Berner et al (1983) show lower carbon dioxide concentrations So there is some doubt about the extent to which atmospheric caibon dioxide concentrations were higher than present values during the Pliocene Figure 7 3b is a partial re construction of Northern Hemisphere annual precipitation, this was generally greater during the Pliocene Of special interest is increased annual precipitation in the and regions of Middle Asia and Northern Africa where temperatures were lower than at present in summer

Unceitainties associated with the interpretation of these rcconstiuctions are considerable and include

1)	Imprecise dating of the records, especially those from the continents (uncertainties of 100,000 years or more),

2)	Differences from the present day surface geography, including changes in topography thus Tibet was at least 1000m lower than now and the Greenland ice sheet may have been much smaller,

3)	The ecology of life on Earth from which many of the proxy data are derived was significantly different

See also Sections 5 5 3 and 4 10

72 2 2 Eemian mtei glacial optimum (125 000 130 000 Mai s BP)

Palaeo-botamc oxygen-isotopc and other geological data show that the climates of the warmest parts of some of the Pleistocene mterglacials were considerably warmer (1 to 2°C) than the modern climate They have been considered as analogues of future climate (Budyko and Izrael, 1987, Zubakov and Borzenkova, 1990) Atmospheric carbon dioxide reached about 300 ppm during the Eemian optimum (Section 1) but a more important cause of the warmth may have been that the eccentricity of the Earth s orbit around the sun was about twice the modern value, giving markedly more radiation in the northern hemisphere summer The last interglacial optimum (125 000 130 000 >ears BP) has sufficient information (Velichko ct al 1982 1983 1984 and CLIMAP 1984) to allow quantitative reconstructions to be made of annual and seasonal air

Figure 7.4: Departures of summer air temperature (°C) from modern values for the Eemian interglacial (Velichko et al, 1982, 1983 1984)

temperature and annual precipitation for part of the Northern Hemisphere For the Northern Hemisphere as a whole, mean annual surface air temperature was about 2°C above its immediately pre-industrial value Figure 7 4 shows differences of summer air temperature, largest (by 48°C) in northern Siberia, Canada and Greenland Over most of the USSR and Westein Europe north of 50-60°N, temperatures were about 1-3°C warmer than present South of these areas temperatures were similar to those of today, and precipitation was substantially larger over most parts of the continents of the Northern Hemisphere In individual regions of Western Europe the north of Eurasia and Soviet Central Asia and Kazakhstan annual precipitation has been estimated to have been 30-50% higher than modem values

It is difficult to assess quantitatively the uncertainties associated with these climate reconstructions The problems include

1)	Variations between the timing of the deduced thermal maximum in different records,

2)	The difficulties of obtaining proxy data in arid areas,

3)	The absence of data from North America and many other continental regions in both Hemispheres

7 2 2 3 Climate of the Holocene Optimum (5 000-6 000 yeai v BP)

The Early and Middle Holocene was characterized by a relatively warm climate with summer temperatures in high northern latitudes about 3 4°C above modern values Between 9 000 and 5 000 years BP, there were several

short-lived warm epochs, the last of which, the mid Holocene optimum, lasted from about 6,200 to 5,300 years BP (Varushchenko et al., 1980). Each warm epoch was accompanied by increased precipitation and higher lake levels in subtropical and high latitudes (Singh et al., 1974; Swain et al„ 1983). However, the level of such mid-latitude lakes as the Caspian Sea, Lake Geneva and the Great Basin lakes in the USA was lowered (COHMAP, 1988; Borzenkova andZubakov, 1984).

Figures 7.5a and b show maps of summer surface air temperature (as departures from immediately pre-industrial values) and annual precipitation for the mid-Holocene optimum in the Northern Hemisphere. This epoch is

Figure 7.5: Departures of: (a) summer temperature (°C), (b) annual precipitation (mm), from modern values for the Holocene climatic optimum (Borzenkova and Zubakov, 1984; Budyko and Izrael, 1987).

Figure 7.5 (continued): (c) Summer temperatuies (relative to the mid-twentieth century) in Europe and China between 5,000 and 6,000 BP (after Huntley and Prentice, 1988; Wang el al . personal communication).

sometimes used as an analogue of expected early-21 st century climate. The greatest relative warmth in summer (up to 4°C) was in high latitudes north oi 7()°N (Lozhkin and Vazhenin, 1987). In middle latitudes, summer temperatures were only 1-2°C higher and fuither south summer temperatures were olten lowei than today, loi example in Soviet Central Asia, the Sahaia. and Aiabia. These areas also had increased annual precipitation. Annual precipitation was about 50-100 mm higher than at present

in the Northern regions of Eurasia and Canada but in central regions of Western Europe and in southern regions of the European USSR and West Siberia there were small decreases of annual precipitation. The largest decrease in annual precipitation took place in the USA, especially in central and eastern regions (COHMAP, 1988).

The above reconstructions are rather uncertain; thus Figure 7.5a disagrees with reconstructions of temperature over north east Canada given by Bartiein and Webb (1985). However the accuracy of reconstructions is increasing as more detailed information for individual regions in both hemispheres becomes available. For instance, the CL1MANZ project has given quantitative estimates of Holocene temperature and precipitation in areas from New Guinea to Antarctica for selected times (Chappell and Grindrod, 1983). Detailed mid-Holocene reconstructions of summer temperature in Europe and China are shown in Figure 7.5c.

7.3	The Modern Instrumental Record

The clearest signal of an enhanced greenhouse effect in the climate system, as indicated by atmosphere/ocean general circulation models, would be a widespread, substantial increase of near-surface temperatures. This section gives special attention to variations and changes of land surface air temperatures (typically measured at about two metres above the ground surface) and sea surface temperatures (SSTs) since the mid-nineteenth century. Although earlier temperature, precipitation, and surface pressure data are available (Lamb, 1977), spatial coverage is very poor. We focus on changes over the globe and over the individual hemispheres but considerable detail on regional space scales is also given.

Figure 7.6: Land air temperatures, expressed as anomalies relative to 1951-80. Annual values from P.D. Jones. Smoothed curves of values from P.D. Jones (1861-1989) (solid lines). Hansen and Lebedeff (1880-1987) (dashed lines), and Vinnikov et al. (1861-1987 NH and 1881-1987 SH) (dots), (a) Northern Hemisphere, (b) Southern Hemisphere.

7.4	Surface Temperature Variations and Change

7.4	1 Hemispheric and Global

74 11 Land

Three reseaich groups (Jones el al 1986a,b, Jones, 1988, Hansen and Lebedeff, 1987, 1988, and Vinnikov et al , 1987, 1990) have produced similar analyses of hemispheric land surface air temperature vanations (Figure 7 6) from bioadly the same data All three analyses indicate that during the last decade globally-averaged land temperatures have been higher than in any decade in the past 100 to 140 years (The smoothed lines in Figure 7 6, as for all the longer time series shown in this Section, are pioduced by a low pass binomial filter with 21 teims operating on the annual data The filtci passes fluctuations having a period of 20 years or more almost unattenuated)

Figure 7 6 shows that temperatuie increased from the relatively cool late nineteenth centuiy to the relatively warm 1980s, but the pattern of change differed between the two hemispheres In the Northern Hemisphere the temperature changes over land aie nregular and an abrupt warming of about 0 3°C appears to have occurred duiing the early 1920s This climatic discontinuity has been pointed out by Ellsaesser et al (1986) in their inteipretation of the thermometric lecoid Northern Hemispheie temperatures prior to the climatic discontinuity in the 1920s could be interpreted as varying about a stationary mean climate as shown by the smoothed curve The nearest approach to a monotonic trend in the Noithern Hemispheie time series is the dcciease ol temperatuie fiom the late 1930s to the mid-1960s ol about 0 2°C The most lecent warming has been dominated by a relatively sudden increase of nearly 0 3°C over less than ten years belore 1982 Of course, it is possible to fit a monotonic trend line to the entire time senes such a tiend fitted to the curient version of the Jones (1988) data gives a iate ol wanning of 0 53°C/1OO years when the trend is calculated from 1881 to 1989 or the reduced d less reliable value ol 0 45°C/100 years if it is calculated from 1861 Clear!) this is a gross oversimplification of the obsci ved vanations even though the computed lineal trends aie highly significant in a statistical sense

The data for the Southern Hemispheie include the Antarctic land mass since 1957 except for the data of Vinnikov et al (1987 1990) Like the Northern Hemisphere, the climate appeals stationaiy thioughout the latter half of the nineteenth century and into the early part of the twentieth centuiy Subsequently theic is an upward trend in the data until the late 1930s but in the next three decades the mean temperatuie iemains essentially stationary again A fairly steady incicase of temperature resumes before 1970 though it may have slowed iecently Linear trends for the Southern Hemispheie are 0 52 C/100 years from 1881 to 1989 but somewhat less and less reliable, at 0 45°C/100 yeais foi lhepeiiod 1861 1989

The interpretation of the rise in tempeiature shown in Figure 7 6 is a key issue foi global wanning so the accuracy of these data needs careful consideiation A number of problems may have affected the record discussed in turn below

1)	Spatial coverage of the data is incomplete and varies greatly,

2)	Changes have occurred in observing schedules and practices,

3)	Changes have occurred in the exposures ol thermometers,

4)	Stations have changed their locations

5)	Changes in the environment especially urbanisation have taken place around many stations

Land areas with sufficient data to estimate seasonal anomalies of temperature in the 1860s and 1980s arc shown (with ocean aieas) in Figure 7 7 Decades between these times have an mteimediate coveiage Theic aie obvious gaps and changes in coverage Prior to 1957 data for Antarctica are absent while some othci parts ol the global land mass lack data as late as the 1920s foi example many parts of Africa parts of China the Russian and Canadian Arctic and the tropics of South Amcnca In the 1860s coverage is spaiscst thus Afnca has little oi no data and much of Noith America is not coveted The effect of this drastically changing spatial coverage on hennsphciic tempeiature variations has been tested by Jones et al (1986a b) who find that spaise spatial coverage exaggerates the vailability of the annual avciages The [eduction in vailability ol the Noithein Hemispheie annual time senes altei about 1880 (Figuie 7 6) is attubuted to this effect Remarkably then analysis using a frozen grid cxpeiintent (see Section 7 4 13 foi a detailed discussion for the combined land and ocean data) suggests that changes of station density since 1900 have had iclatix el) little impact on estimates of hemispheric land tempeiature anomalies However pnoi to 1900 the decadal unccitainty could be up to 0 1°C This is quite small iclative to the ovctall change Thus vatying data coveiage does not seem to have had a serious impact on the magnitude o! the perceived wanning ovet land ovei the last 125 yeats

Another potential bias anses horn changes m observation schedules Even today there is no international standaid for the calculation of mean daily tempcialuie Thus each country calculates mean daily temperatuie by a method of its choice such as the avciagc of the maximum and the minimum, or some combination ol houily leadings weighted according to a fixed formula As long as each countiy continues the same practice the shape ol the tempeiature lecord is unaffected Unfoitunatclv few counincs have maintained the same practice ovei the past centuiy biases have therefore been introduced into the climate iecord some oi which have been coirected lor in

(a) 1861-1870 PERCENTAGE COVERAGE OF OBSERVATIONS CONTOURS AT 10%, 50%, 90%

(b) 1980-1989 PERCENTAGE COVERAGE OF OBSERVATIONS CONTOURS AT 10%, 50%, 90%

Figure 7.7: Coverage of land surface air (P.D. Jones) and sea surface (UK Meteorological Office) temperature data. Isopleths are percentage of seasons with one or more month's data in 5° x 5° boxes in a given decade. Contours drawn for 90%, 50% and 10% coverage, (a) 1861-70, (b) 1980-89.

existing global data sets, but some have not. These biases can be significant; in the USA a systematic change in observing times has led to a nominal 0.2°C decrease of temperature in the climate record since the 1930s (Karl et al., 1986). The effects of changing observation time have only been partly allowed for in the USA temperature data used in analyses presented here. So an artificial component of cooling of rather less than ().2°C may exist in the USA part of the temperature analyses for this reason, offsetting the warming effects of increasing urbanisation in that country. Artificial changes of temperature of either sign may exist in other parts of the world due to changes in observation time but have not been investigated.

Substantial systematic changes in the exposure of thermometers have occurred. Because thermo-meters can be affected by the direct rays of the sun, reflected solar radiation, extraneous heat sources and precipitation, there has been a continuous effort to improve their exposures

over the last 150 years. Additional biases must accompany these changes in the thermometric record. Since many of the changes in exposure took place during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, that part of the record is most likely to be affected. Recently, Parker (1990) has reviewed the earlier thermometer exposures, and how they evolved, in many different countries. The effects of exposure changes vary regionally (by country) and seasonally. Thus tropical temperatures prior to the late 1920s appear to be too high because of the placement of thermometers in cages situated in open sheds. There is also evidence that for the mid-latitudes prior to about 1880 summer temperatures may be too high and winter temperatures too low due to the use of poorly screened exposures. This includes the widespread practice of exposing thermometers on the north walls of buildings. These effects have not yet been accounted for in existing analyses (see Section 7.4.2.2).

Changes in station environment can seriously affect temperature records (Salinger, 1981) Over the years, stations often have minor (usually under 10 km) lelocations and some stations have been moved from rooftop to giound level Even today, international practice allows for a variation of thermometer heights above ground from 1 25 to 2 metres Because large vertical temperature giadients exist near the ground, such changes could senously affect thermometer records When lelocations occur in a random manner, they do not have a serious impact on hemisphcnc or global temperature anomalies, though they impaii our ability to develop information about much smaller scale temperature variations A bias on the large scale can emerge when the character of the changes is not random An example is the systematic relocations of some observing stations from inside cities in many countries to more rural airport locations that occutred several decades ago Because of the heat island effect within cities such moves tend to introduce aitificial cooling into the climate record Jones et al (1986a, b) attempt in some detail to adjust for station relocations when these appear to have introduced a sigmlleant bias in the data but Hansen and Lebedeff (1988) do not believing that such station moves cancel out over large time and space averages Vinnikov et al (1990) do adjust lor some of these moves Theie are several possible correction procedures that have been or could be, applied to the Jones (1988) data set (Bradley and Jones, 1985, Karl and Williams 1987) All depend on denser networks ol stations than are usually available except in the USA Euiopc the Western Soviet Union and a few other areas

Of the above problems mcieasing urbanisation around fixed stations is the most sei ious source of systematic ciioi for hemispheric land tcmpciatuie time series that has so far been identified A number of reseaicheis have tned to ascertain the impact of uibamsation on the tempciatuic record Hansen and Lebcdefl (1987) found that when they removed all stations having a population in 1970 of greatci than 100,000, the licnd of tcmpciatuie was ieduced by 0 1°C over 100 yeais They speculated that peihaps an additional 0 1 °C of bias might remain due to mcieases in urbanisation around stations in smallei cities and towns Jones et al (1989) estimate that the effect of uibamsation in then quality-contiolled data is no more than 0 1°C ovei the past 100 yeais This conclusion is based on a comparison of then data with a dense network of mostly rural stations over the USA Groisman and Koknaeva (1990) compare the data Horn Vinnikov et al (1990) with the lural American data set and with ruial stations in the Soviet Union and find veiy small warm ielative biases of less than 0 05°C pci 100 yeais In the USA Kail et al (1988) find that mcieases due to uibamsation can be significant (0 1°C), even when uiban aicas have populations as low as 10 000 Othci aieas of the globe aic

now being studied Preliminary results indicate that the effects of urbanisation are highly regional and time dependent Changes in urban warming in China (Wang et al , 1990) appear to be quite laige over the past decade, but in Australia they are rathei less than is observed in the USA (Coughlan et al , 1990) Recently Jones and co workers (paper in preparation) have compared tiends derived from their quality-controlled data and those ol Vinnikov et al (1990), with specially selected data fiom more rural stations in the USSR, eastern China, and Australia When compared with trends liom the mote ruial stations only small (positive) differences of tempeiaturc trend exist in the data used in Jones (1988) and Vinnikov et al (1990) in Austiaha and the USSR (of magnitude less than 0 05°C/l00 years) In eastern China the data used by Vinnikov et al (1990) and Jones (1988) give smaller warming trends than those derived fiom the moie rural stations This is an unexpected result It suggests that eithci (1) the moie iural set is sometimes affected by urbanisation or, (2) othci changes in station chaiactci istics ovei compensate for uiban warming bias Thus it is known that the effects of biases due to increased urbanisation in the Hansen and Lebedeff (1987) and the Vinnikov et al (1990) data sets are partly offset by the artificial cooling introduced by the movement of stations from city centres to more rural an port locations during the 1940s to 1960s (Karl and Jones 1990) Despite this, some of these new ruial airpoit locations may have suflcrcd recently lrom increasing urbanisation

In light of this evidence, the estimate provided by Jones et al (1989) of a maximum overall wanning bias in all three land data sets due to urbanisation of 0 I °C/1()() years or less is plausible but not conclusive

74 12 Sea

The oceans compnse about 61% of the Northern Hemisphere and 81% of the Southern Hemisphere Obviously a compilation of global lempeiatuie vanations must include ocean temperatures Farmer et al (1989) and Bottomley et al (1990) have each created historical analyses of global ocean SSTs which aic denved mostl) fiom obseivations taken by commercial ships These data aic supplemented by weathei ship data and in recent yeais by an increasing number of drifting and moored buoys The Farmei et al (1989) analyses are denved liom a collection of about 80 million observations assembled in the Compiehcnsive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set (COADS) in the USA (Woodrulf et al , 1987) The data set used b_\ Bottomley et al (1990) is based on a slightly smallei collection of over 60 million observations assembled by the United Kingdom Meteorological Office Most but not all ol the obseivations in the lattei aie contained in the COADS data set

Figure 7.8: Sea surface temperature anomalies 1861 1989, relative to 1951 1980 Annual values (bars) and solid curves from UK

Meteorological Office data Dashed curves from Farmer et al (1989) (a) Northern Hemisphere (b) Southern Hemisphere

NDlGC	ONO MOL

TJI	P i
04.	

Long-term variations of SSTs over the two hemispheres, shown in Figure 7 8, have been, in general, similar to their land counterparts The increase in temperature has not been continuous There is evidence for a fairly rapid cooling in SST of about 0 1 to 0 2°C at the beginning of the twentieth century in the Northern Hemisphere This is believed to be real because night marine air temperatures show a slightly larger cooling The cooling strongly affected the North Atlantic, especially after 1903 and is discussed at length by Helland-Hansen and Nansen (1920) The cool period was terminated by a rapid rise in temperature starting after 1920 This resembled the sudden warming of land temperatures, but lagged it by several years Subsequent cooling from the late 1950s to about 1975 lagged that over land by about five years, and was followed by renewed warming with almost no lag compared with land data Overall warming of the Northern Hemisphere oceans since the late nineteenth century appears to have been slightly smaller than that of the land (Figure 7 8a) and may not have exceeded 0 3°C

In the Southern Hemisphere ocean (remembering that the Southern Ocean has always been poorly measured) there appear to have been two distinct stable climatic periods the first lasting until the late 1920s the second lasting from the mid 1940s until the early 1960s Since the middle 1970s SSTs in the Southern Hemisphere have continued to rise to their highest levels of record Overall

warming has certainly exceeded 0 3°C since the nineteenth century, but has probably been less than 0 5°C (Figure 7 8b), and has been slightly less than the warming of the land However if the increases of temperature are measured from the time of their minimum values around 1910, the warming of the oceans has been slightly larger than that of the land Despite data gaps over the Southern Ocean, the global mean ocean temperature variations (Figure 7 9) tend to take on the characteristics of the Southern Hemisphere because a larger area of ocean is often sampled in the Southern Hemisphere than the Northern Hemisphere Overall warming in the global oceans between the late nineteenth century and the latter half of the twentieth century appears to have been about 0 4°C

Significant differences between the two SST data sets presented in Figure 7 8 result mainly from differing assumptions concerning the correction of SST data for instrumental biases The biases arose chiefly from changes in the method of sampling the sea water for temperature measurement Several different types of bucket have been used for sampling made for example, of wood, canvas, rubber or metal but the largest bias arose from an apparently rather sudden transition from various un insulated buckets to ship engine intake tubes in World War II A complex correction procedure developed by Folland and Parker (1989) and Bottomley et al (1990) which

Figure 7.9: Global sea surface, night marine air (crosses) and land air temperature anomalies (dots) 1861-1989, relative to 1951-80 Sea surface temperatures are values from Farmer et al (1989) (solid line) and the UK Meteorological Office (dashed line) Night marine air temperatures from UK Meteorological Office Land air temperatures are equally weighted averages of data from Jones, Hansen and Lebedeff, and Vinnikov et al

creates geographically varying corrections, has been also been used in nearly the same form by Farmer et al Differences tn the two data sets remain, however, primarily because of different assumptions about the mix of wooden versus canvas buckets used during the nineteenth century Despite recommendations by Maury (1858) to use wooden buckets with the thermometer inserted ioi four to live minutes, such buckets may have been much less used in practice (Toynbee, 1874, correspondence with the Danish Meteorological Sei vice, 1989) possibly because of damage iron-banded wooden buckets could inflict upon the hulls of ships Some differences also result even as recently as the 1970s, because the data aie not always denved from identical sources (Woodruff 1990)

No corrections have been applied to the SST data from 1942 to date Despite published discussions about the differences between bucket and engine intake SST data in this period (for example James and Fox 1972) there arc several reasons why it is believed that no fuither corrections, with one ieseivation noted below ate needed Firstly the anomalies in Figuie 7 8 aie calculated fiom the mean conditions tn 1951 1980 So only relatne changes in the mix of data since 1942 are important Secondly many ol the modern ' buckets aie insulated (Folland and Paikcr 1990) so that they cool much less than canvas buckets A comparison of about two million bucket and foui million engine intake data lot 1975-1981 (Bottomley et al 1990) reveals a global mean diffcience of only 0 08’C the engine intake data being the warmer Thus a substantial change in the mix of data types (cuirently about 25 30% buckets) must occur before an appieciable artificial change will occui in Figure 7 8 This conclusion is strongly suppoited by the gteat similarity between time senes of globally-averaged anomalies of colocated SST and night maiinc air temperature data from 1955 to date (not shown) Less

perfect agreement between 1946 and the early 1950s (SST colder) suggests that uninsulated bucket SST data may have been more numerous then than in 1951-80, yielding an overall cold bias of up to 0 1 °C on a global average

Marine air temperatures are a valuable test of the accuracy of SSTs after the early 1890s Biases oi day-time marine air temperatures are so numerous and difficult to overcome that only night time marine air temperatures have been used The biases arise during the day because overheating of the thermometers and screens by solai insolation has changed as ships have changed their physical characteristics (Folland et al 1984) On the other hand appreciable biases of night time data are currently believed to be confined to the nineteenth century and much of the Second Woild Wai Night marine an tcmpcraluics have been found to be much too high relative to SST oi to modem values in certain legions and seasons befoie 1894 (Bottomley et al 1990) These values weie collected using SSTs but subsequently (except in 1941 1945) night maime air tcmpeiature data constitute independent evidence everywhere although corrections are also made lor the increasing heights of ship decks (Bottomley et al 1990) Figure 7 9 indicates that multi decadal global vanations of corrected night time marine air temperature base been quite similar to those of SST To provide a complete pictuie, Figuie 7 9 shows the Farmei et al and UK Meteorological Olficc global SST curves separately along with a global land an tempcratuie senes cieated by aveiaging the series of Jones Hansen and Lebedclf and Vinnikov et al Both SST and night marine an tempeiatuie data appeal to lag the land data by at least five ycais dunng the penod of wanning hom 1920 to the 1940s Howexci some of the apparent warmth of the land at this time max be cnoncous due to the use of open shed screens in the tiopics (Section 7 4 11)

The above results differ appreciably in the nineteenth centuiy fiom those published by Ooit et al (1987) who iollowed the much less detailed correction piocedure of Folland et al (1984) to adjust the COADS SST and all hours marine air temperature data sets Newell et al (1989) also present an analysis quite similar to that of the above authors, based on a UK Meteorological Office data set that was current in early 1988 All these authors obtain higher values of global SST and marine air tcmpeiature in the middle to late nineteenth century typically by about 0 1°C and 0 15°C respectively than are indicated in this report It is oui best judgement that the moic icccnt analyses repiesent a real improvement but the discrepancies highlight the uncertainties in the inter pi elation of eaily marine tempeiatuie tccords Yamamoto et al (1990a) have tried to quantify changing biases in the COADS all hours marine air tempeiatuie data using a mixture oi weather ship air tempeiatuie data tiom the 1940s to 1970s and selected land an temperature data mainly in three tropical coastal legions to calculate time varying corrections Based on these corrections Yamamoto et al (1990b) calculate a global air tempeiatuie anomaly curve lot 1901-1986 of similai oveiall chaiactei to the night manne air temperature cuive in Figuie 7 9 but with typically 0 15°C warmer anomalies in the eaily pait of the twentieth centuiy, and typically 0 1°C coolei anomalies in the waim period around 1940 1950 Recent data are similar It could be argued that the collections ol Yamamoto et al may be influenced by biases in the land data including waim biases arising from the use ol tropical open sheds earlier this century Warm biases may also exist in some ocean weather ship day-time air tempeiatuie data (Folland 1971) Although we believe that the night marine an tcmpeiature analysis in Figuie 7 9 minimises the known sources of error the work of Yamamoto et al undei lines the level of uncertainty that exists in tiends derived from manne an temperature data

74 11 Land and sea combined

Combined land and sea surface temperatures show a significant increase of temperature from the late nineteenth to the late twentieth century (Figures 7 10a to c) These data aie an average of two data sets a combination of the Jones land data and the Farmer et al SST data and a combination of the Jones land data and the UK Meteorological Office SST data Note that the relative contributions of land and sea to the combined data have vaned according to changing data availability over land and ocean (bottom of Figure 7 10c) Over the globe the combined data gives an increase of temperature of 0 45°C between the average for the two decades 1881-1900 and the decade 1980 89 The comparable inciease lor the Noithein Hemisphcie is 0 42 C and for the Southern Hemisphere 0 48°C A similai calculation toi the changes

ol temperatuie between 1861-1880 and 1980 89 gives 0 45°C 0 38°C and 0 53°C icspectively A linear trend iitted between 1890 and 1989 gives values of 0 50°C/100 years (globe) 0 47°C/100 yeais (Northern Hemisphere) and 0 53°C/1OO years (Southern Hemisphere), a linear trend fitted between 1870 and 1989 gives the reduced values of 0 41 °C 0 39°C and 0 4TC/100 years respectively

Appaient decadal rates of change of smoothed global combined temperature have varied from an increase of 0 21 °C between 1975 and 1985 (largely between 1975 and 1981) to a decrease ol 0 19°C between 1898 and 1908 (though data coveiagc was quite poor around 1900) Surpnsingly the maximum magnitudes of decadal change (warming or cooling) ovei land and ocean (SST) have been quite similai (Figure 7 9) at about 0 25°C Smoothed night global marine air temperature showed the largest apparent change aiound 1900 with a maximum cooling of 0 32°C between 1898 and 1908 though this value is very unccitain

Combined land and ocean temperatuie has increased rather diffcicntly in the Not them than in the Southern Hemisphere (Figuie 7 10) A rapid increase in Northern Hemisphere temperature during the 1920s and into the 1930s contiasts with a more gradual increase tn the Southern Hemisphcie Both hemispheres had relatively stable tempeiatures iront the 1940s to the 1970s though with some evidence of cooling in the Northern Hemisphere Since the 1960s in the Southern Hemisphere, but after 1975 in the Northern Hemisphere temperatures have risen with the oveiall use being more pronounced in the Southern Hemisphere Only a small overall rise was observed between 1982 and 1989

An important pioblem concerns the varying spatial coverage of the combined marine and land obseivations Figure 7 7 indicates that this has been far from uniform in time oi space and even today coverage is not comp-lehensivc Ships have Iollowed pieferred navigational mutes and large aieas ol the ocean have been inadequately sampled The effect that this may have on global estimates oi SSTs has been tested in frozen gud analyses (Bottomley et al 1990) and in eigenvector analyses (Folland and Colman 1988) In the frozen grid analyses, global and hemisphenc time senes were recalculated using data from 5 x5° boxes having data in nominated earlier decades lot example 1861 1870 Remaikably, the small coverage of this period (Figuie 7 7a) appears surprisingly adequate to estimate long term trends probably because the data aie distributed widely in both hemispheres throughout the last 125 years An eigenvector analysis of combined land and ocean data (Colman, personal communication) isolates an undei lying signal of century time scale climate change which is suipusmgly umfoim geographically and very like Figuie 7 10c even though gross regional changes vaiy because of othei iactors Figure 7 lOd shows the

Figure 7.10: Combined land air and sea surface temperatures, 1861-1989, relative to 1951-1980. Land air temperatures from P D. Jones and sea surlace temperatures from the UK Meteorological Office and Farmer et al. (1989). Sea surface temperature component is the average of the two data sets (a) Northern Hemisphere, (b) Southern Hemisphere, (c) Globe. Percentage coverage o! the data is shown for Figure 7.10c, expressed as a percentage of total global surface area for land (dotted line) ocean (dashed line) separately, and for combined data (solid line) plotted annually. 100% coverage would imply that all 5° x 5° boxes had data in two or three months in each season of the year, (d) "Frozen grid" analyses for 1861-1989 for the globe, using land data as above and UK Meteorological Office SST data: 1861-70 coverage (dashed). 1901-10 coverage (dotted), 1921-30 coverage (crosses) and all data (solid line)

results of a frozen grid analysis applied to a combination of the Jones land data and the UK Meteorological Office SST data Frozen grids were defined for 1861-1870, 1901 1910, 1921-30 and global series using these were compared with that incorporating all data (also shown in Figure 7 9) Varying the data coverage has only a small effect on trends, confining the data to the 1861-70 grid augments the temperature increase since the late nineteenth century by about 0 05°C at most However, omission ot much of the Southern Ocean in these tests, as well as air temperatures over the Arctic ocean north of 80°N, is a cause for concern So the uncertainties in trends due to varying data coverage may be underestimated by Figure 7 lOd

In models forced with enhanced greenhouse gases (Sections 5 and 6), warming over the land is substantially gicater than that over the ocean, so that the steadier and lai ger warming of the Southern Hemisphere in recent decades is not predicted The latter may be part of a global-scale natural fluctuation of the ocean cnculation (Street-Perrott and Perrott, 1990) Comparing Northern Hemisphere land and ocean, Figure 7 11 shows that the land is now relatively warmer than the oceans by the about the same amount as in the period of global warming during the first half of this century Southern Hemisphere land (not shown) shows no recent warming relative to the oceans

In summary, the overall increase of temperature since the nineteenth century can be estimated as follows It is probable that a small residual positive bias remains in the land surface temperatures due to increasing urbanisation (Section 74 11) However, the contribution of the urbanisation bias is at least halved in recent decades in the combined ocean and land data, so it is unlikely to exceed 0 05°C From Figure 7 lOd, allowing for areas never adequately sampled, we estimate that vaiying data covciage produces an uncertainty in trend ol at least ±0 05°C We also recognise the existence of sevcial other sources of bias, highlighted by some disagreements between individual analyses, but are uncertain as to their tiue sign Therefore our best estimates of the lowei and upper limits of global warming between the late nineteenth century and the 1980s are about 0 3°C and not more than 0 6”C respectively, slightly less than most pievious estimates

7.4.2	Regional, Seasonal, and Diurnal Space and Time Scales

We show that regional, including zonally-averaged, climate variations often do not match those of the globe as a whole Some apparent differences between large-scale variations ot temperature in different seasons are shown Finally we discuss variations of maximum and minimum daily temperatures over the relatively restricted areas so far analysed

Figure 7.11: Differences between land air and sea surface temperature anomalies, relative to 1951 80, for the Northern Hemisphere 1861-1989 Land air temperatures from P D Jones Sea surface temperatures are averages of UK Meteorological Office and Farmer et al (1989) values

7 42 1 Land and Sea

Regional time scries suffer from many near-random errors that can nearly cancel in analyses of global and hemispheric temperatures (Kleshchenko et al, 1988) The 20° latitude x 60° longitude areas analysed in Figure 7 12a have been chosen to be large enough to minimise random errors and yet be small enough to capture the individual character of regional temperature changes Figure 7 12a demonstrates considerable regional variability in temperature trends which nevertheless evolve coherently between adjacent regions Particularly striking is the peak warmth in the north east Atlantic and Scandinavian regions around 1940 45 followed by a sharp cooling, and the strong warming in the South Atlantic and much ot the Indian Ocean since about 1965

Figure 7 12b shows zonally averaged land air temperature and SST anomalies using the same data as in Figure 7 12a Almost uniformly cooler conditions in the nineteenth century are clearly seen in all zones, extending into the early twentieth century Warming around 1920-1940 occurs in most zones, except perhaps over the northern part of the Southern Ocean, with a strong warming, exceeding 0 8°C occurring to the north of 60°N over this period Note that the polar cap (north of 80°N) has insufficient data lot analysis and insufficient data exist to calculate rcpicsentativc zonal means south of 40°S until after 1950 The cooling after 1950 was mainly confined to the Northern Hemisphere, though weak cooling is evident in the Southern Hemisphere tropics between about 1940 and the early 1950s There was renewed warming in most Southern Hemisphere zones before 1970 This warming continued until the early 1980s but then slowed markedly However very little change of temperature is evident over Antarctica (south of 60°S) since records began there around 1957 Renewed warming is seen in the Northern Hemisphere in all zones after the early 1970s, including small rises in high latitudes, a fact hitherto little appreciated probably because of the marked cooling in the

(b)

1870	1890	1910	1930	1950	1970

Year

Figure 7.12: (a) Regional surface temperature anomaly variations over 20° latitude x 60° longitude boxes and Antarctica (regions south of 60°S). (b) Zonal averages of combined sea surface and land air temperature data, 1861-1989. Land air temperatures from P.D. Jones and sea surface temperatures from the UK Meteorological Office.

Atlantic/Barents Sea sector in recent decades (Figure 7.12a) which is not seen elsewhere in high latitudes. The temperature curve cited by Lindzen (1990) as showing recent Arctic cooling is in fact one representative of the North Atlantic Arctic sector only (much as Figure 7.12. third curve from the left, northernmost row) and is therefore not properly representative of high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere as a whole. General circulation models with'enhanced concentrations of carbon dioxide tend to show largest increases of annual mean temperature

in Northern Hemisphere polar latitudes. The rate of warming has slowed again in many Northern Hemisphere zones in recent years and, almost simultaneously, cooling in the middle to high latitude Atlantic sector has ceased.

Figure 7.13 shows the pattern of temperature anomalies in 1950-59, 1967-76 and 1980-89. Much of the Southern Hemisphere has warmed steadily since 1950-59. with a few exceptions, for example, parts of Brazil and Antarctica. In the Northern Hemisphere the middle decade of those shown was coolest (see Figures 7.6, 7.8, 7.10). The most

(a) 1950 - 1959 SURFACE TEMPERATURE ANOMALIES

(b) 1967 - 1976 SURFACE TEMPERATURE ANOMALIES

(c) 1980 - 1989 SURFACE TEMPERATURE ANOMALIES

Figure 7.13: Decadal surface temperature anomalies, relative to 1951-80. Isopleths every 0.25°C; dashed isopleths are negative values; dotted positive anomalies 0.25 to 0.5°C; heavy-shaded greater than 0.5“C. Heavily shaded negative values less than -0.25°C. Land air temperatures from P.D. Jones and sea surface temperatures from the UK Meteorological Office, (a) 1950-59, (b) 1967-76, (c) 1980-89. Also shown in the colour section.

consistent recent warming is found in subtropical and tropical regions, especially the Indian Ocean and regions near to, and including, the tropical South Atlantic By contrast, cooling occurred in paits of the extratropical North Pacific and North Atlantic, especially between 1970 and 1985 Recent warming has also been weak or absent over the Canadian archipelago, the Eastern Soviet Union, and Europe In Section 7 9 it will be shown that some of these regional temperature variations are linked to regional-scale fluctuations in the circulation of the atmosphere, so it is not surprising that pronounced variations in regional temperature trends occur

74 22 Seasonal i ai tations and c houses

Figure 7 14 indicates that the increase of land based temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere since 1975 has largely consisted of an increase between December and May, but with little increase between June and November In the Southern Hemisphere there is little difference in recent seasonal trends (not shown) Of some concern are substantial differences in seasonal trends beiore 1900 in the Northern Hemisphere The relative warmth of summer and coolness of winter at that time reflect considerably greater seasonal differences of the same character in the continental interiors of North America and Asia (not shown) It is not clear whether a decrease in the seasonal cycle of temperature that commenced around 1880 is real, it could be due to changes in the circulation of the atmosphere or it may reflect large, seasonally dependent, biases in some nineteenth century land data The latter might arise from the progressive changes of thermometer exposure known to have occurred then (Section 7 4 11) The Southern Hemisphere (not shown) shows a similar decrease in the seasonal cycle of temperature in the last

0

0

0

0

><

E o

-0

o o.

67

4-

Year

Figure 7.14: Smoothed seasonal land surface air temperature anomalies, relative to 1951-80, for the Northern Hemisphere Data from P D Jones

part of the nineteenth century, but with less than half the amplitude ol that in the Northern Hemisphere

7 4 2 1 Day-time and Nn>ht time

Because the ocean has a large heat capacity, diurnal temperature variations in the ocean and in the overlying air are considerably muted compared with those over land and, from a climatic point of view, are likely to change little Over land, diurnal variations are much less restricted so the potential for relative variations in maximum and minimum temperature is much larger Such relative changes might result from changes in cloudiness, humidity, atmosphcnc circulation patterns windiness or even the amount ol moisture in the ground Unfoitunately, it is not yet possible to assess variations of maximum and minimum tempeiatuie on a hemispheric or global scale However in the regions discussed below, multi-decadal tiends of day-time and night-time temperatuies have been studied and do not always appear to be the same

Figure 7 15a, second panel shows a rise ol minimum temperatures (these usually occur around dawn) in the USA The rise has not been reflected in maximum temperatures (which usually occur during mid-afternoon) (See also Section 7 10 1) Similar behaviour has been found in other parts of North America (Karl et al , 1984) Appreciably different variations of maximum and minimum temperatures on decadal time-scales are also observed at inland stations in Australia (Figure 7 15b) It is unlikely that urban heat islands play a significant role in these variations as the data for both countries have been extensively scrutinized for urban heat island biases In China (Figure 7 15c), the minimum temperature also appears to have risen more than the maximum It is uncertain to what extent increases in urbanisation contribute to the changes in China, especially as urban heat island biases tend to be greatest during the night Over New Zealand, a strong influence of atmospheric circulation variations on variations in daily maxima relative to daily minima has been observed (Salinger, 1981) This is an indication that the above results can only be fully understood when changes in atmospheric circulation over these countries have been studied in some detail

Temperature anomaly (°C)

	L J	
Mir		

Figure 7.15: Changes of maximum (day-time) and minimum (night-time) temperatures, (a) United States, (b) South-eastern Australia, (c) China.

7.5	Precipitation and Evaporation Variations and Changes

7.5./ Precipitation Over Land

Several large-scale analyses of precipitation changes over the Northern and Southern Hemisphere land masses have been carried out (Bradley et al., 1987; Diaz et al., 1989; Vinnikov et al.. 1990). These have demonstrated that during the last few decades precipitation has tended to increase in the mid-latitudes, but decrease in the Northern Hemisphere subtropics and generally increase throughout the Southern Hemisphere. However, these large-scale

features contain considerable spatial variability. Figure 7.16 illustrates this variability for three regions in the Northern Hemisphere and East Africa. Annual precipitation over the Soviet Union displays a remarkably consistent increase over the twentieth century (Figure 7.16a). An apparent increase in precipitation has been found over northern Europe (Schdnwcisc and Birrong, 1990) with a suggestion of a decrease in extreme southern Europe, though these data have not yet been corrected for changing instrumental biases. In the tropics, East African rainfall departures from normal show significant decadal

Figure 7.16: Standardised regional annual precipitation anomalies (a) USSR, (b) Sahel, (c) East Africa, (d) All India monsoon Note that Sahel values are annual averages of standardised station values restandardised to reflect the standard deviation of these annual averages

variability, but consistent trends are absent (Figure 7 16c) Summer monsoon rainfall in India also reflects multi decadal changes tn climate (Figure 7 16d), but consistent trends are also absent The period 1890-1920 was characterised by a high frequency of droughts in India, while 1930-1964 had a much lower frequency Since 1965 the frequency of droughts has again been higher relative to 1930-1964 (Gadgil 1988), mostly in the wet aieas of north eastern India (Gregoiy 1989)

The dramatic drying of sub Saharan Africa shown in Figure 7 16b deserves special comment Various explanations have been pioposed leviewcd in Diuyan (1989), see also Semazzi et al (1988) and Wolter (1989) The most consistent icsult ol these studies was to show ovei the last few decades a pattern ot anomalously high SSTs in the Atlantic south of about 10°N lower than normal SSTs in the Atlantic to the noith of 10°N and lnghei

SSTs in the tropical Indian Ocean (Figure 7 13c) There has been a distinct weakening of some these patterns recently and a return to near normal rainfall in 1988 and 1989 Such large-scale changes of SST appear to have a major impact on the sub-Saharan atmospheric circulation (Folland et al 1990, Wolter, 1989) Although SST changes appear to be strongly related to the decreased rainfall since the 1950s they are probably not the only cause (Nicholson 1989) Folland et al (1990) show however that at least 60U of the variance of Sahel rainfall between 1901 and 1988 on time scales of one decade and longer is explained b_\ worldwide SST variations Reductions ol lainlall occurred at much the same time immediately south of the Sahel and ovei much ol Ethiopia and the Caribbean

It is important to consider the accuiacy of the piecipitation data sets Precipitation is more difficult to momtoi than tempeiature as it varies much more in time

and space A higher spatial density of data is needed to provide an analysis of variations and trends of compaiable accuracy High density data often reside within national meteoiological centres, but thcie is no icgular international exchange The number of stations required to sample a regional rainfall climate adequately varies with region and an adequate number may not always be available

A severe problem for analysing multi decadal variations of precipitation lies in the fact that the efficiency ol the collection of precipitation by raingauges varies with gauge siting construction and climate (Sevruk 1982, Folland 1988, Legates and Willmott 1990) Majoi influences aie the wind speed during rain, the size distribution ol precipitation particle sizes, and the exposure of the raingauge site Fortunately, appropuate climatological averages ol the Inst two, highly variable quantities can be used to assess usefully their ellects over a long enough period (Folland, 1988, Appendix 1) Collection efficiency has tended to increase as operational practices have improved, often in poorly documented ways that may give aitificial upward trends in precipitation in some legions Thus precipitation data are not completely compatible between countries due to the lack of agreed standards Of particular concern is the measurement of snowfall from conventional gauges where errors of at least 40% in long teim collection efficiency can occur When piccipitation eriors arc expicsscd as a percentage of the Hue rainfall it is not surprising that they tend to be greatest in high latitude windy, climates and least in wet equatorial regions

Vinnikov et al, (1990) have carried out detailed collections to USSR data foi the varying aciodynamic and wetting problems suffered by gauges These corrections are incorporated in the record shown in Figure 7 16a though no aerodynamic corrections were thought necessaiy in summer In winter the (positive) aerodynamic corrections can be large and vary from 5% to 40% (the latter foi snow) Wetting corrections, which are also positive and tend to be largest in summer, varied typically in the range 4% to 10% and were applied after correction for aerodynamic effects Despite these large biases, comparisons of data sets ovei the USSR from Bradley et al (1987) who only partially coirected foi biases, and Vinnikov et al who coircctcd more extensively show that most of the important longterm variations are apparent in both data sets (Bradley and Groisman, 1989) Many of the major variations apparent in precipitation records are evident in hydrological data such as the rise in the levels of the North American Great Lakes Great Salt Lake and the Caspian Sea during the early 1980s, and the severe desiccation of the Sahel Nevertheless the lack of bias corrections in most rainfall data outside the USSR is a severe impediment to quantitative assessments of rainfall trends

7	5 2 Rainfall Over The Oceans

Quantitative estimates of piccipitation over the oceans are limited to the tiopics wheie they aie still veiy appioximate The mean temperature of the uppei suilaces of convective clouds deduced from satellite measurements of outgoing long wave thermal radiation (OLR) are used to estimate mean rainfall over periods of days upwaids The colder the clouds the less is OLR and the heavier the rainfall (Section 4 gives ieferences) Nitta and Yamada (1989) found a significant downward tiend in OLR averaged over the global equatorial belt 1()°N to 1()°S between 1974 and 1987, implying an increase of equatorial rainfall over that time Arkin and Chelhah (1990) have investigated Nitta and Yamadas iesults foi this Report They find that inhomogeneities in the OLR data are sufficiently serious to cast doubt on Nitta and Yamadas conclusions However the latter s claim that equatonal SST has risen over this penod seems justified (Flohn and Kapala, 1989, and Figures 7 12 and 7 13) This trend is likely to result in increased deep convection and more rainfall there (Gadgil et al 1984, Graham and Barnett, 1987)

Section 7 5 has shown that some regional scale rainfall trends have occurred ovei land However much more attention needs to be paid to data quality and to improving data coverage before more comprehensive conclusions can be diawn about precipitation variations over the global land suilace Precipitation cannot yet be measuied with sufficient accuracy over the oceans to reliably estimate trends, even though quite modest changes in SST in the tropics could give rise to important changes in the distribution of tiopical lainlall (sec also Section 7 9 1)

7 5 3 Evaporation from the Ocean Surface

It is difficult to estimate trends in evaporation from the oceans An increase is however, expected as a result of an increase in greenhouse gases (Section 5) The most important problem concerns the reliability of measurements of wind speed that are an essential component of evaporation estimates Oceanic wind speeds have apparently increased in recent decades However, Cardone et al (1990) have demonstrated that much of this increase can be explained by changes in the methods of estimating w md speed from the state of the sea surface, and changes in the heights of anemometers used to measure wind speed on ships Until these problems are substantially reduced, it is considered that estimates of trends in evaporation are unlikely to be reliable

7.6	Tropospheric Variations and Change

7.6.1	Temperature

Tropospheric and stratospheric temperatures are central to the problem of greenhouse warming because general cnculation models (Section 5) predict that tempeiature

change with enhanced concentrations of greenhouse gases will have a characteristic profile in these layers, with more warming in the mid-troposphere than at the surface over many parts of the globe, and cooling in much of the stratosphere One of the "fingerprint" techniques (Section 8) for detecting anthropogenic climate change depends in part on an ability to discriminate between tropospheric

Year

Figure 7.17: Temperature anomalies in the troposphere and lower stratosphere 1958-1989, based on Angell (1988) (a) Annual global values for 850-300mb Dots are values from Spencer and Christy (1990) (b)300-100mb (c) Annual values for Antarctic (60°S-90°S) for 100-50mb

Year

Figure 7.17 (continued): (d) Annual global anomalies for 1979-1988 tropospheric satellite temperatures from Spencer and Christy (1990) (solid line), 850 300mb radiosonde temperatures based on Angell (1988) (dots), combined land and sea surface temperatures as in Figure 7 10 (dashed line) All anomalies are referred to the average of their respective data sets for 1979-1988

warming and stratospheric cooling (Barnett and Schlesinger, 1987) Observational studies of variations in recent temperature changes with height have been made by numerous authors, for example Parker (1985), Barnett (1986), Sellers and Liu (1988) and Karoly (1989) Layer mean temperatures from a set of 63 radiosonde stations covering the globe have been derived by Angell (1988) Most stations have operated continuously only since about 1958 (the International Geophysical Year) The network is zonally well distributed, but about 60% of the stations are in the Northern Hemisphere and only 40% in the Southern Hemisphere Layer mean temperatures lrom this network have been integrated for the globe Figuie 7 17a shows that over the globe as a whole, mid-tropospheric (850 300 mb) temperatures increased by about 0 4°C between the late 1960s and mid-1980s, with much of the rise concentrated between 1975 and the early 1980s as at the surface Zonal average anomalies for 850-300mb (not shown) indicate that the largest changes occurred in the zone l()°S to 60°S followed by the equatorial region (10°N to 10°S) with little trend north of 60°N or south of 60°S This finding is in good agreement with surface data (Figuies 7 12a and b)

In the upper troposphere (300 100 mb) Figure 7 17b shows that there has been a rather steady decline in temperature since the late 1950s and early 1960s in general disagreement with model simulations that show warming at these levels when the concentration of gieenhouse gases is increased (Section 5) The greatest change in temperature has been in the lowei stratosphcic (100-50 mb) where the

decrease aftci 1980 is much beyond the vai lability of the previous decades It is mostly attributed to changes over and around Antarctica (Figure 7 17c) whcic the cooling since 1973 has reached nearly 10°C in austral spung and 2°C in summer (Angell, 1988) but with small values oi cooling in other seasons A small amount ol lower stratospheric cooling has been observed elsewheie in the Southern Hemisphere, mainly in the tropics, and also in the equatorial belt (10°N to 10°S) The abrupt decrease ovei Antarctica in spring may at least be partly related to the formation of the "ozone hole

Temperatures derived from ladiosondes aie subject to instrumental biases These biases have not been assessed in the data used by Angell (1988) although theie have been many changes in ladiosonde instrumentation over the last 31 years In 1984-85, international radiosonde comparisons were carried out (Nash and Schmidlin 1987) Systematic dillerences between various types of radiosonde were determined for a series of flights which penetrated the tropopause The estimated heights of the lOOmb surface generally differed by up to 10 20 geopotential metres which is equivalent to average differences of 0 25°C in the layei from the surface to 100 mb

7.6.2	Comparisons of Recent Tropospheric and Surface Temperature Data

A measure of the robustness of the tropospheric data derived by Angell (1988), at least in recent years, can be obtained by comparing his 850-300mb data with ten years of independent satellite measuiements analysed by Spencer and Christy (1990) for 1979 1988 Spencer and Christy have used the average of measurements lrom microwave sounding units (MSU) aboaid two USA National Oceanographic and Atmosphenc Administration (NOAA) TIROS-N series of satellites to denve global temperatures in the mid troposphere Although surface and mid-tropospheric data are likely to show rathei difieient changes in their values over individual regions, betlei but not perfect, coupling is expected when the data are aveiaged ovei the globe as a whole Figure 7 17d compares the annual global combined land air tempeiatuie and SST data used in Figure 7 10 with annual values of these two tioposphenc data sets for the penod 1979-1988 in each case the 10 annual anomalies are calculated from their icspcctive 1979-1988 averages The agicement between the three data sets is surprisingly good, despite recent suggestions that it is poor Thus the conclations and root mean squared differences between the surface and MSU data aie 0 85 and 0 08°C respectively, while the correlation between the surface and the radiosonde data is 0 91 The correlation between the two troposphenc data sets is, as expected slightly higher at 0 96 with a root mean squared ditfeience of 0 02°C The latter represents excellent agreement given the relatively spaise network of

radiosondes Note that annual values in both tropospheric data sets have nearly twice the variability of the surface values, as measuicd by their standard deviation This partly explains why the loot mean square difference between the MSU and surface data is appreciably larger than that between the two tropospheric data sets, despite the high correlation This is, arguably, an indication of genuine climatological diffeicnces between the interannual variability ol mid-troposphere temperatures and those of the surface All three data sets show a small positive trend over the period 1979-1988, varying from 0 04°C/decade for the MSU data to () 13°C/decade for the surface data These trends aie not significantly different over this short period and again reflect surprisingly great agreement Further discussion of these results is given in Jones and Wigley (1990)

7.6.3	Moisture

Watei vapour is the most abundant greenhouse gas, and its increases aie expected to augment the warming due to increases of other greenhouse gases by about 50% Trenberth et al (1987) estimate that doubling carbon dioxide concentrations would increase the global concentration of water vapour by about 20%, and Hansen et al (1984) estimate a 33% mcicase

There is evidence that global watei vapour has been a lew percent greater duimg the 1980s than during the 1970s (Elliott et al , 1990) Hense et al (1988), and Flohn et al (1990) find a 20% increase in water vapour content in the mid tioposphere over the equatorial Pacific from 19651986 with at least a 10% rise between the surface and the 300mb level Despite great uncertainties in these data some increase seems to have taken place Because of numerous changes in ladiosondes a global assessment of variations prioi to 1973 is difficult and trends after 1973 have an unceitain accuracy Sec also Section 8

7.7	Sub-Surface Ocean Temperature and Salinity Variations

The sub-suifacc ocean data base is now just becoming sufficient foi climate change studies in the North Atlantic and North Pacific basins to be carried out A few, long, local time senes of sub-surface measurements exist, sufficient to alert the scientific community to emerging evidence of decadal scale temperature variability in the Atlantic Ocean Beginning about 1968, a fresh, cold water mass with its origins in the Arctic Ocean appears to have circulated aiound the sub-Arctic gyre of the North Atlantic Ocean This event has been described by Dickson et al (1988) as the Gieat Salinity Anomaly Some of this cold, fresh water penetrated to the deep waters of the North Atlantic (Biewer et al, 1983) The marked cool anomalies

in the Noith Atlantic SST shown in Figure 7 13 foi 196776 partly reflect this event

Recently, Levitus (1989a, b, c d) has can ted out a ntajoi study ol changes ol sub surlacc temperature and salinity of the North Atlantic Ocean between 1955 59 and 1970 74 1955-59 was near the end of a very warm period ol North Atlantic suiface waters, but by 1970-74 the subsequent cool period was well developed (Figure 7 13) Coolei water extended liom neai the sea surface to 1400m depth in the subtropical gyre (30-50°N) Beneath the subtropical gyre, a warming occurred between the two periods North ol this gyre there was an increase in the temperature and salinity of the western sub aictic gyic The density changes associated with these changes in tempeiature and salinity indicate that the tiansport of the Gull Stream may have dccieased between the two periods Temperature difference fields along 24 5°N and 36 5°N piesented by Roemmich and Wunsch (1984) based on data gathered during 1981 and the late 1950s, aie consistent with these ideas

Antonov (1990) has earned out a complementary study lor the North Atlantic and North Pacific using subsurface tempeiature data held in the USSR and SST data fionr the UK Meteoiological Office He finds that zonal aveiages of tempeiature changes between 1957 and 1981 show statistically significant cooling in the upper layers and a warming below 600m when averaged over the North Atlantic as a whole This agrees well with Levitus results for the North Atlantic Basin mean tempeiatuie changes (1957 to 1981) for the North Atlantic and North Pacific, as computed by Antonov, aie shown in Figure 7 18

The reasons for some of these changes are partially understood For example, the cooling of the upper 1400m

Temperature change

Figure 7.18: Sub-surface ocean temperature changes at depth between 1957 and 1981 in the North Atlantic and North Pacific Adapted from Antonov (1990)

of the subtropical gyre was due to an upwaid displacement of cooler fieshei watei Why this displacement occuncd is not definitely known but most piobably is lclated to changes in the large scale wind held ovei the Noith Atlantic Ol paiticular importance is the tempcratuic increase of approximately 0 1°C ovei, on average, a thousand metre thick layci in the deep North Atlantic because it represents a relatively large heat storage Even the uppei few metres of the ocean can store as much heat as the entire overlying atmosphenc column ol an Scientists have long lecogm/ed (Rossby, 1959) that the ocean could act to store large amounts of heat thiough small temperature changes in its sub-surface layeis foi hundreds or thousands of years When this heat ieturns to the atmospheie/cryosphcre system it could also significantly affect climate Section 6 gives more details

The magnitude and extent of the obscived changes in the temperature and salinity of the deep Noith Atlantic are thus large enough that they cannot be neglected in future theories of climate change

7.8	Variations and Changes in the Cryosphere

Snow, ice, and glacial extent aie key variables in the global climate system They can influence the global heat budget through regulation of the exchange of heat moistuie, and momentum between the ocean, land, and atmosphere Accurate mioimation on cryospheric changes is essential foi lull undeistanding of the climate system Cryospheric data are also integrator of the variations ol several variables such as temperatuie, sunshine amount and precipitation, and foi sea-ice, changes in wind stiess Therefore caution must be exercised when interpieting a cryospheric change Variations in the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets are discussed in Section 9

7.8.1	Snow Cover

Surface-based observations of snow covei aie sufficiently dense for regional climate studies of the low lying aieas ol the Northern Hemispheie mid-latitudes Unfortunately, a hemisphere-wide data set of mid-latitude snow covei observations has not yet been assembled (Barry and Armstrong, 1987) In fact sustained high-quality measurements are generally incomplete (Karl et al , 1989) Since 1966 Northern Hemisphere snow cover maps have been produced operationally on a weekly basis using satellite imagery by NOAA The NOAA data contain snow/no-snow infoimation lor 7921 grid boxes coveting the globe and weie judged by Sciakionc and Robock (1987) as the best of four data sets which they compared Deficiencies have been noted by Wicsnct et al (1987) such as until 1975 the chaits did not consistentlv include Himalayan snow cover, there were occasional extensions ol the southern edge ol the snow covei beyond obseived

Snow extent anomaly (106 km2)

Year

Figure 7.19: Northern Hemisphere snow extent anomalies. Data from NOAA (USA).

surface limits; the seasonal variation of sunlight limits polar coverage in the visible wavelengths; and scattered mountain snows are omitted because of the coarse grid resolution. Data are believed to be usable from 1972 with caution, but are better from 1975 onwards.

Consistent with the surface and tropospheric temperature measurements is the rapid decrease in snow cover extent around 1980 (Figure 7.19). This decrease is largest during the transition seasons. Robinson and Dewey (1990) note that the reduction in snow cover extent during the 1980s is largest in Eurasia where they calculate decreases during autumn and spring of about 13% and 9% respectively relative to the 1970s.

7.8.2	Sea-ice Extent and Thickness

There has been considerable interest in the temporal variability of global sea-ice in both the Arctic and Antarctic (for example, Walsh and Sater, 1981; Sturman and Anderson, 1985). This interest has been increased by general circulation model results suggesting that greenhouse warming may be largest at high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere. It must be recognized, though, that sea-ice is strongly influenced by surface winds and ocean currents so that the consequences of global warming for changes in sea-ice extent and thickness are unlikely to be straightforward.

Sea-ice limits have long been observed by ships, and harbour logs often contain reported dates of the appearance and disappearance of harbour and coastal ice. These observations present many problems of interpretation (Barry, 1986) though they arc thought to be more reliable after about 1950. Changes and fluctuations in Arctic seaice extent have been analysed by Mysak and Manak (1989); they find no long term trends in sea-ice extent between 1953 and 1984 in a number of Arctic ocean regions but substantial decadal time scale variability was

Figure 7.20: (a) Northern Hemisphere, and (b) Southern Hemisphere sea-ice extent anomalies. Data from NOAA (USA).

evident in the Atlantic sector. These variations were found to be consistent with the development, movement and decay of the "Great Salinity Anomaly" noted in Section 7.7.

Sea-ice conditions are now reported regularly in marine synoptic observations, as well as by special reconnaissance flights, and coastal radar. Especially importantly, satellite observations have been used to map sea-ice extent routinely since the early 1970s. The American Navy Joint Ice Center has produced weekly charts which have been digitised by NOAA. These data are summarized in Figure 7.20 which is based on analyses carried out on a 1° latitude x 2.5° longitude grid. Sea-ice is defined to be present when its concentration exceeds 10% (Ropelewski, 1983). Since about 1976 the areal extent of sea-ice in the Northern Hemisphere has varied about a constant climatological level but in 1972-1975 sea-ice extent was significantly less. In the Southern Hemisphere since about 1981, sea-ice extent has also varied about a constant level. Between 1973 and 1980 there were periods of several years when Southern Hemisphere sea-ice extent was either appreciably more than or less than that typical in the 1980s.

Gloersen and Campbell (1988) have analysed the Scanning Multi-channel (dual polarization) Microwave Radiometer data from the Nimbus 7 satellite from 1978 1987 They find little change in total global ice area but a significant decrease ol open water within the ice Their time series is short, and it is uncertain whether the decrease is real

Sea-ice thickness is an important parameter but it is much more difficult to measure than sea-ice extent The heat flux from the underlying ocean into the atmosphere depends on sea-ice thickness Trends in thickness over the Arctic Ocean as a whole could be a sensitive indicator of global warming The only practical method of making extensive measurements is by upward-looking sonar from submarines Apart from a very recent deployment of moorings, data gathering has been carried out on voyages by military submarines In the past repeated tracks carried out in summer have either found no change in mean thickness (Wadhams 1989) or variations that can be ascribed to interannual variability in summer ice limits and ice concentration (McLaren 1989) Recently however, Wadhams (1990) found a 15% or larger decrease in mean sea-ice thickness between October 1976 and May 1987 over a large region north of Greenland Lack of a continuous set of observations makes it impossible to assess whether the change is part of a long term trend In the Antarctic no measurements of thickness variability exist and so far only one geographically extensive set of sea-ice thickness data is available (Wadhams et al 1987)

7.8.3	Land Ice (Mountain Glaciers)

Measurements of glacial ice volume and mass balance are more informative about climatic change than those of the extent of glacial ice, but they aic considerably scarcer Ice volume can be determined fiom transects of bedrock and ice surface elevation using airborne radio-echo sounding measurements Mass balance studies performed by measuring winter accumulation and summer ablation are slow and approximate, though widely used Section 9 discusses changes in the Greenland and Antarctic ice-caps so attention is confined here to mountain glaciers

A substantial, but not continuous, recession of mountain glaciers has taken place almost eveiywhere since the latter half of the nineteenth century (Grove, 1988) This conclusion is based on a combination of mass balance analyses and changes in glacial terminus positions, mostly the latter The recession is shown in Figure 7 2, evidence for glacial retreat is found in the Alps, Scandinavia Iceland, the Canadian Rockies, Alaska, Central Asia, the Himalayas, on the Equator, in tropical South America, Ncv> Guinea, New Zealand, Patagonia, the sub Antarctic islands and the Antarctic Peninsula (Grove 1988) The rate of recession appears to have been gencially laigcst between about 1920 and 1960

Glacial advance and retreat is influenced by tcmpcialurc precipitation, and cloudiness Foi example al a given latitude glaciers tend to extend to lower altitudes in wetter cloudier, maritime regions with cooler summers than in continental regions The complex relation between glaciers and climate makes their ubiquitous recession since the nineteenth century remarkable temperature changes appeal to be the only plausible common factor (Oerlemans 1988) The lesponse time of a glacier to changes in envuonmcntal conditions varies with its size so that the larger the glacici the slower is the response (Hacberh et al 1989) In recent decades glacial recession has slowed in some regions Makarevich and Rototaeva (1986) show that between 1955 and 1980 about 27% of 104 North American glaciers were advancing and 53% were retreating whereas over Asia only about 5% of ncaily 350 glaciers were advancing Wood (1988) found that from I960 to 1980 the number of retreating glacieis decreased This may be related to the relatively cool period in the Northern Hemisphere over much of this time (Figure 7 10) However Pat/clt (1989) finds that the proportion of retreating Alpine glaciers has increased sharply since the early 1980s so that ictrcat has dominated since 1985 in this region A similar analysis for other mountain regions after 1980 is not yet available

7.8.4	Permafrost

Permafrost may occur where the mean annual air temperatures are less than 1 °C and is generally continuous where mean annual temperature is less than 7°C The vertical profile of temperature measurements in permafrost that is obtained by drilling boreholes can indicate integrated changes of temperature over decades and longer However, interpretation of the profiles requires knowledge of the ground conditions as well as natuial oi human induced changes in vegetation cover Lachcnbruch and Marshall (1986) provide evidence that a 2 to 4 C wanning has taken place in the coastal plain oi Alaska at the permafrost surface over the last 75 to 100 ycais but much of this rise is probably associated with wanning prior to the 1930s Since the 1930s there is little evidence lor sustained warming in the Alaskan Arctic (sec Figure 7 12a and Michaels, 1990) A fuller undcistandmg of the relationship between permafrost and temperatuic requnes better information on changes in snow cover seasonal variations of ground temperature, and the impact of the inevitable disturbances associated with the act of drilling the bore holes (Bairy 1988)

7.9	Variations and Changes in Atmospheric Circulation

The atmospheric circulation is the mam control behind iegional changes in wind temperature, precipitation soil moisture and othci climatic variables Variations in many

ol these factors ate quite strongly related thiough large scale leatures ol the atmospheric circulation as well as through interactions involving the land and ocean suilaces One goal ol research into regional changes of atmospheric circulation is to show that the changes of temperature rainfall and other climatic variables are consistent with the changes in frequency of various types of weathei pattern

Climates at the same latitude vaiy considerably aiound the globe, while variations in regional tempeiatures that occur on decadal time scales are far from uniiotm but form distinctive large-scale patterns as indicated in Figuie 7 13 The spatial scale of these climatic patterns is pailly governed by the regional scales ol atmosphenc cnculation patterns and ol their vanalions Change'- in weather patterns may involve changes in the quasi stationary atmospheric long waves in the extratropics oi in monsoonal circulations (van Loon and Williams 1976) Both phen onicna have a scale ol seveial thousand kilometies Their latgc-scale leatures are lelated to the fixed spatial patterns ol land and sea, topography, sea tempeiatuic patterns and the seasonal cycle of solar heating

Persistent laigc scale atmosphenc patterns tend to be wavehke so that legional changes ol atmosphenc heating 11 poweilul and persistent enough can give use to a sequence of temote atmosphenc distuibances Thus a numbei of well sepaiated aieas ol anomalous tempeiatuic and piecipitation oi opposite chaiactei may be pioduced The best known examples aie in pait ielated to the laige changes in SSTs that accompany the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), whereby changes in the atmosphcic ovei the tiopical Pacific often associated with the SST changes there arc linked to atmosphenc cnculation changes in highei latitudes (Wallace and Gut/lei 1981) The 1988 North Amencan drought has been claimed to be paitly a response to peisistent positive tiopical SST anomalies located to the west of Mexico and to the north ol the cold La Nina SST anomalies existing at that time (Tienberth et al 1988) Such localised SST anomalies may themselves have a much largei scale cause (Nannas 1989)

An emerging topic concents obsei vational evidence that the 1 1 year solai cycle and the stratosphenc quasi biennial oscillation (QBO) of wind dnection neai the equatoi aie linked to changes in troposphenc cnculation in the Northern Hemisphere (van Loon and Labitzke 1988) Coherent variations in troposphenc circulation are claimed to occui over each 11 year solai cycle in cctlain legions but their chaiacter depends ciucially on the phase (easterly or westeily) of the QBO No mechanism has been proposed foi this eilect and the data on the QBO covei only about 3 5 solar cycles so that the reality ol the effect is vety unceilain However Bainston and 1 ivese} (1989) in a caieiul stud} find evidence foi statistical!} significant influences of these factors on atmosphenc cnculation patterns in the Noithein Hemisphere cxtiatiopics in wintei

Many previous largely unsubstantiated claims of links between the 11 year, and other solar cycles, and climate are reviewed in Pittock (1983) Section 2 discusses current thinking about the possible magnitude of the physical forcing of global climate by solar radiation changes in some detail

Several examples are now given of links between changes in atmospheric circulation over the last century and regional-scale variations or trends of temperature

7 9.1 El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Influences ENSO is the most prominent known source of mterannual vai lability in weather and climate around the world, though not all areas are affected The Southern Oscillation (SO) component of ENSO is an atmospheric pattern that extends ovei most of the global tiopics It pnncipally mxolves a seesaw in atmospheric mass between regions near Indonesia and a tropical and sub-tropical south east Pacific Ocean region centred near Easter Island The influence of ENSO sometimes extends to higher latitudes (see Section 7 9 3) The El Nino component of ENSO is an anomalous warming of the eastern and central tiopical Pacific Ocean In majoi Wai nr Events wanning extends over much of the tiopical Pacific and becomes clearly linked to the atmospheric SO pattern An opposite phase of Cold Events with opposite patterns of the SO is sometimes icfciicdtoas La Nina ENSO events occui every 3 to 10 ycais and have tai teaching climatic and economic influences around the world (Figuie 7 21a adapted from Ropelewski and Halpcit 1987) Places especially affected include the tiopical ccntial and East Pacific islands, the coast of noith Peiu eastern Austialia New Zealand (Salmgci 1981) Indonesia India (Parthasarathy and Pant, 1985) and parts of eastern (Ogallo, 1989) and southern Ahica (van Heeiden et al 1988) A fullei descnption of ENSO can be found in Rasmusson and Carpenter (1982) and Zebiak and Cane (1987) Over India, the occurrence of ENSO and that of many droughts (see Section 7 5 1) is stnkingly coincident Droughts tend to be much more hcqucnl in the Inst year of an ENSO event though, intiigumgly this is often befoie the ENSO event has fully developed However not all Indian dioughts aie associated with ENSO

While ENSO is a natural part of the Eaiths climate, a major issue concents whether the intensity or frequency of ENSO events might change as a result of global warming Until recently the models used to examine the climatic consequences of enhanced greenhouse forcing had such simplified oceans that ENSOs could not be simulated Some models now simulate ENSO like but not entirely icalistic SST variations (Section 4) unloitunately long teim variations in ENSO cannot be studied }et using models The observational lecord leveals that ENSO events have changed in ficquency and intensity in the past The

(a)

20W	0	20E	40	60	80	100	120	140	160E	180	160W	140	120	100	80	60	40	20

20W	0	20E	40	60	80	100	120	140	160E	180	160W	140	120	100	80	60	40	20

Figure 7.21: (a) Schematic diagram of areas and times of the year with a consistent ENSO precipitation signal (adapted from Ropelewski and Halpert, 1987). (b) Monthly tropical sea surface and land air temperature anomalies 1961-1989; land data from P.D. Jones and sea surface temperature data from the UK Meteorological Office. Tropics extend from 20”N to 20°S. Arrows mark maximum ENSO warmth in the tropics.

strong SO fluctuations from 1880 to 1920 led to the discovery and naming of the SO (Walker and Bliss, 1932) and strong SO events are clearly evident in recent decades. A much quieter period occurred from the late 1920s to about 1950, with the exception of a very strong multi-year ENSO in 1939-42 (Trcnbcrth and Shea, 1987; Cooper et al., 1989). Quinn et al. (1987) (covering the past 450 years) and Ropelewski and Jones (1987) have documented historical ENSO events as seen on the northwest coast of South America. Therefore, the potential exists for a longer palaeo-record based on river deposits, ice cores, coral growth rings and tree rings.

During ENSO events, the heat stored in the warm tropical western Pacific is transferred directly or indirectly to many other parts of the tropical oceans. There is a

greater than normal loss of heat by the tropical oceans, resulting in a short period warming of many, though not all, parts of the global atmosphere (Pan and Oort. 1983). Consequently, warm individual years in the record of global temperatures (Figure 7.10) are often associated with El Ninos. Maxima in global temperatures tend to occur about three to six months after the peak warmth of the El Nino (Pan and Oort, 1983). Figure 7.21b shows monthly anomalies of combined land surface air temperatures and SST for the global tropics from 1961-1989. The strong, coherent, warming influence of the 1972-73. 1982-83 and 1986-88 ENSO events on the record of tropical temperature is very clear, as is the cold influence of the strong La Nina episodes of 1974-75 and 1988-89.

From an inter-decadal perspective, ENSO is a substantial source of climatic noise which can dominate the tropical temperature record. It is possible to remove ENSO signals statistically (for example Jones, 1989) to give a smoother global temperature curve: in this way 20 to 30% of decadal and shorter time scale variance is removed. The warming of the globe in the last 15 years then is reduced by about 0.1’C, i.e., by about one half. However other temperature signals might also be partly removed at the same time, for example those relating to the effects of volcanic eruptions, though some ability to separate these signals has recently been shown (Mass and Portman, 1989) (sec also Section 2). As it is unclear whether ENSO might change with and contribute directly to long-term global warming, it seems preferable to retain ENSO variability as an integral part of the global climate record.

7.9.2	The North Atlantic

The early twentieth century cooling of the Northern Hemisphere oceans (Figure 7.8) was accompanied by a period of intensified westerlies in the extratropical Northern Hemisphere, especially in the Atlantic sector, that affected most of the year. An extensive discussion is given in Lamb (1977). The global warming which took place in the 1920s and 1930s (Figure 7.10) was largest in the extratropical North Atlantic and in the Arctic (Figure 7.12), and coincided with the latter part of the period of intense westerlies. The westerly epoch is regarded as finishing around 1938 (Makrogiannis et al., 1982). 'Hie effects of the enhanced westerlies on surface climate were clearest in winter when there was an absence of very cold outbreaks over Europe and winters were persistently mild. Rogers (1985) noted that the best correlation between temperatures in Europe and wind direction is with the westerly component, largely reflecting whether or not the encroaching air masses have had an oceanic moderating influence imposed on them. Figure 7.22 shows an index of westerly flow expressed as the difference in atmospheric pressure measured at mean sea level between the Azores and Iceland in winter. High index epochs have stronger or more frequent westerly flow across the extratropical North Atlantic. Also shown is the air temperature anomaly over northern Europe and the adjacent seas from 45’N-60*N and 5*W-35*E in winter. The inter-decadal variations of the pressure index arc strikingly large, with weakest flow centred around the late 1960s (less westerlies) and a return to a stronger westerlies recently (Flohn ct al., 1990). Wallen (1986) notes that the period of intense westerly flow also affected summer temperatures in western Europe, making them generally cooler between the late 1890s and about 1920, giving striking decreases in the differences between July and January temperatures. This suggests that at least a small part of the decrease in the annual range of

Figure 7.22: Smootlied standardised indices in winter (using binomial filter with 21 terms applied three limes) of difference in atmospheric pressure at mean sea level between Ponta Delgada, Azores and Stykkisholmur, Iceland (solid line) and surface temperature for 45*-60*N, 5*W-35*E, based on land air (P.D. Jones) and night marine air temperature (UK Meteorological Office). December 1866-February 1867 to December 1989-February 1990.

Northern Hemisphere land surface air temperature seen at this time in Figure 7.14 may be real.

Variations in the westerly index of Figure 7.22 are associated with changes in the depth of the Iceland low pressure centre both near the surface and in the troposphere (van Loon and Rogers, 1978). European temperatures well downstream arc quite strongly related to this Atlantic pressure index, especially during winter, being warmest when the index is largest , i.e., pressure over Iceland is lowest relative to the Azores. Relative to the level of the westerly pressure index, there is a long-term increase of European winter surface air temperature in Figure 7.22, much as noted by Moses ct al. (1987) for a small set of stations in western Europe. Above normal winter temperatures in Europe tend to go hand-in-hand with below normal temperatures in Greenland and the Canadian Arctic where there are increased norlhcrlics as a result of the deeper Iceland Low. Stronger westerlies over the Atlantic, do not, therefore, account for the Arctic warming of the 1920s and 1930s on their own: in fact they preceded it by 20 years. Iceland (Einarsson, 1984) and Spitsbergen began to warm after about 1917 (Lamb, 1977), whereas Greenland and Northern Canada did not warm until the mid-1920s (Rogers, 1985). When both Greenland and Northern Europe had above normal temperature, especially in the winter half year, the atmospheric circulation was more zonal around most of the Arctic, not just in the Atlantic sector. This was associated with increased cyclonic activity over the whole Arctic basin which

increased the frequency of zonal flows over the higher latitudes of the continents Note that the charactei ol the warming experienced in the higher latitude Northern Hemisphere in the the 1920s and 1930s differs from that of the mid-1970s to early 1980s (Figure 7 10) when the North Atlantic and Arctic stayed cool, or in parts, cooled further

Inter-decadal changes in the west African monsoon circulation which have pai ticulaily affected Sub-Saharan African rainfall (Figure 7 16) were introduced in Section 7 5 1 The main change in atmospheric circulation has been in the convergence of winds into sub Saharan Africa in summer from the north and the south (Newell and Kidson, 1984), less intense convergence gives less rainfall (Folland et al, 1990) Drier years are also often accompanied by a slightly more southerly position of the mam wind convergence (rain bearing) zone The North Atlantic subtropical high pressure belt also tended to extend further southward and eastwaid during the summer in the dry Sahel decades (Wolter and Hastcnrath, 1989)

7.9.3	The North Pacific

Circulation changes in the North Pacific have recently been considerable and have been linked with regional temperature changes Figure 7 23 shows a time series of mean sea level piessure for the five winter months November to March averaged over most of the extra-tropical North Pacilic loi 1946 1988 (Trenberth 1990) This index is closely related to changes in the intensity of the Aleutian low pressuie centre It is also quite stiongly linked to a pattern of atmospheric circulation variability known as the Pacific North American (PNA) pattern (Wallace and Gutzler 1981) which is mostly confined to the Noith Pacific and to extratropical Noilh America All five wintci months showed a much deepei Aleutian Low in the period 1977 to 1988 with icduced piessuie ovei nearly all the extratropical Noith Pacilic north ol about 32 N (Flohn et al 1990) The change in pressuie in Figuie 7 23 appears to have been unusually abiupt othei examples of such climatic discontinuities have been analysed (Zhang et al 1983) though discontinuities can sometimes be artifacts of the statistical analysis of lriegulai time series The stronger Aleutian Low lesulted in waimei moistei an being carried into Alaska while much colder an moved south over the North Pacific These changes account for the large Pacific temperature anomalies tor 1980-89 shown in Figure 7 13, which are even cleaier for the decade 197786 (not shown) This decade had a positive anomaly (relative to 1951 80) ol over 1 5°C in Alaska and negative anomaly ol more than 0 75°C in the cential and western Noith Pacific

The above changes aie likely to have been lelated to conditions in the equatonal Pacific 1977 1987 was a period when much of the tiopical Pacilic and tiopical Indian Oceans had persistently above normal SSTs (Nitta

Figure 7.23: Time series of mean North Pacific sea level pressures averaged over 27 5 to 72 5°N, 147 5°E to 122 5°W for November through March Means for 1946 76 and 1977 87 are indicated

and Yamada, 1989, and Figure 7 12a) Very strong El Nino events and a lack of cold tropical La Nina events in the period 1977-1987 (Figure 7 21b) contributed to this situation

7.9.4	Southern Hemisphere

In Antarctica strong surface temperature inversions form in winter but elsewhere in the Southern Hemisphere maritime influences dominate The SO has a pronounced influence on precipitation over Australia (Pittock 1975) and also affects New Zealand temperatures and piecipitation (Gordon 1986) However the best documented iegional circulation-temperature relationship in the Southern Hemisphere is that between an index of the meridional (southerly and noitherly) wind (Trenbcith 1976) and New Zealand temperatuie The index is calculated b\ subtiacling sea level piessuie values measured at Hobait (Tasmania) horn those at Chatham Island (east ol New Zealand) A tendency lor moie northeily mean llow acioss New Zealand (Hobart pressure lelatively low) especiallx hom about 1952 to 1971 has been related to geneially waimei conditions in New Zealand after 1950 However a return to more southerly (colder) flow after 1971 is not strongly ieflected in New Zealand temperatures so the recent warmth may be related to the general increase in temperature in much of the Southern Hemisphere (Figures 7 10b, 7 12 and 7 13) This finding indicates that regional temperature changes due to a future greenhouse warming are likely to result from an interplay between large scale warming and changes in local weather patterns

7.10	Cloudiness

Clouds modify both the shortwave (solar) and longwave (terrestrial) radiation, the former by reflection and the latter by absorption Therefore they may cause a net wanning 01 cooling of global temperature, depending on their type distribution, coverage, and radiative characteristics (Sommerville and Remer, 1984 Cess and Pottci, 1987) Ramanathan et al (1989) show that with todays distribution and composition ol clouds, their oveiall effect is to cool the Earth (Section 3 3 4) Changes in cloudiness are therefore likely to play a significant role in climate change Furthermore, local and regional climate variations can be strongly influenced by the amount of low middle and high clouds

Observations of cloudiness can be made fiom the Eaith s surface by trained observers from land stations oi ocean vessels, or by automated systems Above the Eaith s surface, aircraft or space platforms are used (Rossow 1989, McGuffie and Henderson-Sellers 1989a) Suipusingly, surface-based observations of cloudiness give closely similar results to space based observations Careful and detailed mtercomparisons, undertaken as a preliminary part of the International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) by Sze et al (1986), have demonstrated conclusively that surface and space based observations are highly correlated Space-based observations of cloudiness fiom major international programs such as ISCCP aie not yet available for periods sufficiently long to detect longterm changes

7.10.1	Cloudiness Over Land

Henderson Sellers (1986	1989) and McGuffie and

Henderson-Sellers (1989b) have analyzed changes in total cloud cover over Europe and Not th America during the twentieth century It was found that annual mean cloudiness increased over both continents Preliminary analyses foi Australia and the Indian sub-continent also give increases in cloudiness The mcieases are substantial 7% ol initial cloudiness/50 years over India 6%/80 yeais over Europe 8%/8O years for Australia and about 10%/90 years lor North America These changes may paitly lesult from alteiations in surface-based cloud observing piactices and in the subsequent processing ol cloud data This may be especially true of the large increase in cloudiness app-aicntly observed in many areas in the 1940s and 1950s At this time (about 1949 or later, depending on the country) the synoptic meteorological code, from which many of these observations are denved generally underwent a majoi change but not in the USA USSR and Canada Observers began recording cloud cover in oktas (eighths) instead of in tenths When skies were partly cloudy it is possible that some observers who had been used to making obseivations in the decimal system converted decimal

observations oi cloud cover eironeously to the same number of oktas theieby ovciestimating the cloud covet

Recently Karl and Sterner (1990) have compared daytime cloudiness statistics ovei the USA with data from automated sunshine recorders They indicate that there was a much larger increase of annual cloud cover during the 1940s than can be accounted for by the small observed decrease in the percentage of possible sunshine The large increase oi cloudiness may be attributed to the inclusion of the obscunng effects of smoke, haze, dust, and fog in cloud cover reports from the 1940s onward (there being no change in the recording practice from tenths to oktas in the USA) The increase in cloudiness after 1950 may be real because an increase is consistent with changes in the tempciatuic and precipitation lecords in the USA, including the decreased diuinal temperature range seen in Figure 7 15

Obseived land based changes in cloudiness are difficult to assess Nonetheless total cloud amount appears to have increased in some continental regions, a possibility supported by noticeable reductions in the diurnal range of tempeiature in some of these regions Elsewhere the cloudiness record cannot be interpieted reliably

7.10.2	Cloudiness Over The Oceans

Ocean-based observations of cloud cover since 1930 have been compiled by Warren et al (1988) The data are derived fiom maritime synoptic weather observations Then numbci varies between 100,000 and 2 000,000 each year incieasing with time and the geographic coveiage also changes The data indicate that an increase in marine cloudiness exceeding one percent in total sky covered on a global basis took place fiom the 1940s to the 1950s This increase is not reflected in the proportion of observations having a cleai sky or a complete overcast The largest increases weie in stratocumulus clouds in Northern Hemisphere mid-latitudes and in cumulonimbus in the tiopics Since 1930 mean cloudiness has incieased by 3-4 peicent of the total area of sky in the Northern Hemisphere and by about half of this value in the Southern Hemisphere Fixed ocean weather ships placed after 1945 in the North Atlantic and North Pacilic with well trained observers, showed no trends in cloudiness between the 1940s and 1950s when other ship data lrom nearby locations showed relatively large increases changes of the same sign as those in available land records (Section 7 10 1) It is clearly not possible to be confident that average global cloudiness has really increased

7.11	Changes of climate Variability and Climatic Extremes

Aspects of climate variability include those associated with day-to-day changes inter-seasonal and mterannual var-

iations, and the spatial variability associated with horizontal gradients. A pervasive problem for assessments of changes in the temporal variability of climate is the establishment of a reference level about which to calculate that variability. For example, the results of an investigation to determine whether the variability of monthly mean values was changing could give different results depending on how the average, or baseline, climate was calculated. If the climate was changing, calculations of variability would depend on whether a fixed baseline was used or whether it was allowed to change smoothly or discontinuously. Additionally, attempts to identify whether the number of extremes is decreasing or increasing may be critically dependent on the definition of the threshold value above which an extreme is defined. An attempt was made for this Report to estimate changes in the number of extremes of monthly average temperature values for a globally distributed set of about 150 stations, all having at least 60 years of record. The results were found to be very sensitive to the threshold chosen to define the extreme, and to the baseline climatology selected, so that no firm deductions about changes in extremes or variability were possible.

Figure 7.24: Regional drought and moisture index series. Unshaded region indicates excessive moisture, (a) Part of USSR (from Meshcherskaya and Blazhevich, 1977), (b) India, (c) USA, (d) China.

Interest in climatic variability often includes that on daily time-scales: a common question concerns whether daily temperatures above or below given threshold values, for example frosts, are changing in their frequency. Although considerable local climatic information exists on daily time-scales in any national meteorological data centre, such information covering the globe as a whole is not readily available at any one centre. Thus many of the data needed for a comprehensive assessment of changes in variability still need to be assembled and a scientifically sound method of analysis needs to be developed. Nevertheless a few comments can be made about variability which are discussed below.

7.11.1	Temperature

Several researchers have assessed relationships between anomalously cold or warm seasons and daily temperature variability in the USA. Brinkmann (1983) and Agee (1982) both find reduced day-to-day variability in anomalously warm winters, though Brinkmann (1983) provides evidence

1890	1910	1930	1950	1970	1990

Year

lonships are highly sensitive to the choice of region There appears to be little relation between interannual variability and the relative warmth or coldness of decadal averages Although Diaz and Quayle (1980) found a tendency for increased variability in the USA during the relatively warm years of the mid-twentieth century (1921-1955), Karl (1988) found evidence for sustained episodes (decades) of very high and low mterannual variability with little change in baseline climate Furthermore, Balling et al (1990) found no relationship between mean and extreme values of temperature in the desert southwest of the USA

7.11.2	Droughts and Floods

An important question concerns variations in areas affected by severely wet (' flood ) or drought conditions However, drought and moisture indices calculated for Australia (not shown), parts of the Soviet Union, India, the USA, and China (Figure 7 24, previous page) do not show systematic long-term changes Although this does not represent anything like a global picture, it would be difficult to envisage a worldwide systematic change in variability without any of these diverse regions participating It is noteworthy that the extended period of drought in the Sahel (Figure 7 16) between 1968 and 1987 exhibited a decreased interannual variability of rainfall compared with the previous 40 years even though the number of stations used remained nearly the same

7.11.3	Tropical Cyclones

Tiopical cyclones derive their energy mainly from the latent heat contained in the water vapour evaporated from the oceans As a general rule, for tropical cyclones to be sustained, SSTs must be at or above 26°C to 27°C at the present time Such values are confined to the tropics, as well as some subtropical regions in summer and autumn The high temperatures must extend through a sufficient depth of ocean that the wind and wave action of the storm itself does not prematurely dissipate its energy source For a tropical cyclone to develop, its parent disturbance must be about 7° of latitude or more from the equator Many other influences on tropical cyclones exist which are only partly understood Thus ENSO modulates the frequency of tropical storms in some regions for example over the north-west Pacific, mainly south of Japan (Li, 1985, Yoshino, 1990), East China (Fu and Ye, 1988) and in the central and southwest Pacific (Revell and Gaulter 1986) The reader is referred to Nicholls (1984), Gray (1984), Emanuel (1987) and Raper (1990) for more detail

Have tropical cyclone frequencies or their intensities increased as the globe has warmed over this century’ Current evidence does not support this idea perhaps because the warming is not yet large enough to make its impact felt In the North Indian Ocean the frequency of tropical storms has noticeably decreased since 1970 (Figure

Year

Figure 7.25: Estimated number of tropical cyclones in

(a) Atlantic, and (b) North Indian Oceans over the last century

Data in (b) is less reliable before about 1950

7 25) while SSTs have risen here since 1970, probably more than in any other region (Figure 7 13) See also Raper (1990) There is little trend in the Atlantic, though pronounced decadal variability is evident over the last century There have been increases in the recorded frequency of tropical cyclones in the eastern North Pacific, the southwest Indian Ocean, and the Australian region since the late 1950s (not shown) However, these increases are thought to be predominantly artificial and to result from the introduction of better monitoring procedures Relatively good records of wind speed available from the North Atlantic and western Pacific oceans do not suggest that there has been a change toward more intense storms either

7.11.4	Temporales of Central America

Temporales are cyclonic tropical weather systems that affect the Pacific side of Central America and originate in

the Pacific Inter-tropical Convergence Zone Very heavy rainfall totals over several days occur with these systems, but unlike hurricanes their winds are usually weak Their atmospheric structure is also quite different from that of huiricanes as they possess a cold mid-tropospheric coie Temporales typically last several days, are slow moving and cause damaging floods and landslides in the mountainous regions of Central America Records of temporales are available since the 1950s They were markedly more frequent in the eailier than in the later pait of this period Thus there was an average of 2 4 temporales per year in 1952 1961 (Hastenrath 1988) only 1959 had no temporales In 1964-1983 the average reduced to 0 45 temporales per year and in 12 of these years there were none

When the evidence in Section 7 11 is taken together, we conclude that there is no evidence of an increasing incidence of extreme events over the last few decades Indeed some of the evidence points to recent decreases, for example in cyclones over the North Indian Ocean and tempoiales over Central America

7.12	Conclusions

The most important finding is a warming of the globe since the late nineteenth century of 0 45 ± 0 15°C, suppoited by a worldwide recession of mountain glaciers A quite similar warming has occuircd ovei both land and oceans This conclusion is based on an analysis of new evidence since previous assessments (SCOPE 29 1986) and iepresents a small reduction in pievious best estimates of global temperature change The most impoilant diagnosis that could not be made concerns tcmpeiatuie vanations ovei the Southern Ocean Recent tiansient model iesults (Section 6) indicate that this legion may be iesistant to long teim tempeiature change A data set of blended satellite and ship SST data is now becoming available and may soon piovide an initial estimate ol iecent Southern Ocean tempeiature changes

Piecipitation changes have occuned ovei some huge land regions in the past ccntuij but the data sets aie so pooi that only changes of Luge size can be momtoicd with any conlidence

Some substantial regional atmospheric circulation vanations have occuned over the last century notably ovei the Atlantic and Europe Regional vanations in temperature trends have also been quite substantial This indicates that, in futuie regional climatic changes may sometimes be quite diverse

Natural climate vanations have occurred since the end of the last glaciation The Little Ice Age in paiticulai invoiced global climate changes of comparable magnitude to the wanning of the last century It is possible that some of the wanning since the nineteenth ccntuiy may leflcct the

cessation of Little Ice Age conditions The iather rapid changes in global temperature seen around 1920 -1940 arc very likely to have had a mainly natural origin Thus a better undcistanding of past variations is essential if we aie to estimate reliably the extent to which the wanning ovei the last century, and future warming, is the result of an increase of greenhouse gases

References

Agee EM 1982 A diagnosis of twentieth century temperature records at West Lafayette Indiana Cltni Cham;i 4 399 418

Alexandre P 1987 Le Climat en Europe au Moyen Age Contribution a 1 histoire des variations climatiques de 1000 a 1425 dapres les sources narratives de I Europe Occidentale Ec Hautes Etud Sci Soc Ruh Hist Si i Sin 24 Pans 827pp

Angell J K 1988 Variations and trends in tropospheric and stratospheric global temperatuies 1958 87 / Chin 1 1296 1313

Antonov J I 1990 Recent climatic changes ol vertical ihcrmal structure of the North Atlantic and Noith Pacific Oceans Mctunol iGidii>loi> 4 (in picss)

Arkin PA and M Chelliah 1990 An assessment of variations of outgoing longwave radiation ovei the tiopics 1974 1987 Draft Repoit to IPCC WG1 Section 7

Balling RC Ji J A Skindlow and D H Phillips 1990 The impact of increasing summer mean temperatuies on extreme maximum and minimum temperatuies at Phoenix Arizona / Clnn (in picss)

Barnett TP 1986 Detection ol changes in the global tioposphenc temperatuie field induced by gieenhouse gases / Ginphw Ri s 91 6659 6667

Barnett TP and M E Schlesinger 1987 Detecting changes in global climate induced by greenhouse gases / Gtopliw Ri s 92 14772 14780

Barnston AG and RE Livesey 1989 A closer look it the effect of the 1 1 year solar cycle and the quasi biennial oscillation on Northern Hemispheie 700mb height md extratropical Noith American suiface tempciatuic I Clnn 2 1295 1313

Barrv RG 1988 Peimafrost data and information status and needs In K Senneset (Ed) Pumajiost Filth Intonation il Conf Ptoc Vol 1 Tapir Publishers Trondheim ppi 19 122

Barn RG 1986 The sea ice data base In Untcistcmcr (Td ) The Giophwii \ of Sin hi Plenum Press New Yoik 1099 1134

Barrv RG and RL Armstrong 1987 Snow cover data management The role of WDC A for Glaciology Ihiltnl Su / 32 281 295

Bartiein PJ and T Webb III 1985 Mean July temperatures at 6000BP in eastern North America regression equations toi estimates from fossil pollen data In Chntain Chump tn Canada 5 C R Harrington (Ed ) Sylloecus 55 N monal Museum ol Canada Ottawa 301 342

Berger A 1980 The Milankovitch astronomical thcoiy ol palaeoclimatcs a modern rev tew \ i\ias in Viionoim 24 103 122

Berner RA, AC Lasaga and RM Gairels 1983 The caibonate-silicate geochemical cycle and its ellect on cat bon dioxide over the past 1 10 million years Am J Sc , 283 7, 641 683

Bor/enkova, I I , and V A Zubakov, 1984 Climatic Optimum of the Holocene as a model of the global climate at the beginning of the 21st century Metecnol iGidiolog N8 69 77 Also Sov Met Hydr , 8 52-58

Bottomley, M, CK Folland, J Hsiung R E Newell and D E

Parker, 1990 Global Ocean Surface Temperature Atlas (GOSTA) Joint Meteorological Officc/Massachusetts Institute of Technology Project Project supported by US Dept ol Eneigy, US National Science Foundation and US Oil ice ol Naval Research Publication funded by UK Depts ol Eneigy and Environment 20+iv pp and 313 Plates HMSO, London Bradley, R S , and P D Jones, 1985 Data bases for isolating the

ellccts of increasing carbon dioxide concentiation In Detec tint’ the Climatic Effects of inc leasing ecu bcm dioxide, M C MacCracken and F M Luthei (Eds) USA Dept of Energy Carbon Dioxide Reseatch Division pp29 53

Bradley, RS HF Diaz, J K Eischeid P D Jones, P M Kelly and CM Goodess, 1987 Precipitation fluctuations o\ei Northern Hemisphere land areas since the mid-19th century Science, 237, 171 175

Bradley, RS, and P Ya Grotsman 1989 Continental scale piecipitation variations tn the 20th century In Pioc Int Conf Piecip Meaxuiement\,'WMO Geneva (tn press)

Brewer, P G . W S Broecker, W J Jenkins P B Rhines, C G Rooth, J H Swift, T Takahashi and R T Williams, 1983 A climatic freshening of the deep Atlantic (north of 5()°N) ovei the past 20 years S< ze/zee, 222, 1237 1239

Brinkmann, WAR, 1983 Vanability ol temperature in

Wisconsin Mon Weath Rex 111, 172 180

Broecker. W S , 1987 Unpleasant surprises in the greenhouse

Natuie, 328, 123 126

Broecker W S D Peteet and D Rind 1985 Docs the oceanatmosphere system have more than one stable mode of operation’ Natuie, 315, 21 26

Budyko, M , A B Ronov and A L Yanshm 1985 The lustoi \ of the Lentil's atmospheie Leningrad Gidrometeoizdat, 209pp (English trans Sprtnger-Verlag, 1987 I 39pp)

Budyko, M, and Yu A Izrael (Eds), 1987 Antln opogenic

C lunatic Changes L Gidrometeoizdat, 404pp

Cardone, V J , J G Greenwood and M A Cane 1990 On trends m historical marine wind data / Chm 3,113 127

Cess, R D , and G L Potter 1987 Exploratory studies ol cloud iadiative forcing with a general circulation model Tellus 39A 460 473

Chappell, J M A , and Grmdrod, A , (Eds), 1983 Proceedings of the first CLIMANZ conference, Howman's Gap, 1981 Dept of Biogeography and Geomorphology, Australian National University, Canberra, 2 vols

CLIMAP Project Members, 1984 The last interglacial ocean

Quatein Res ,21,2, 123-224

COHMAP Members, 1988 Climate changes of the last 18,000 yeais observations and model simulations Science, 241, 1043 1052

Cooper NS, K D B Whysall and G R Bigg, 1989 Recent decadal climate variations tn the tropical Pacific / Climatol, 9 221 242

Coughlan MJ,R Tapp and W R Kinmmonth, 1990 Trends in Australian tempeiature recoids Dralt contribution to IPCC WG1, Section 7

Diaz, H F and RG Quayle, 1980 The climate of the United States since 1985 spatial and temporal changes Mon Weath Rex , 108, 249 266

Diaz HF, RS Bradley and J K Eischeid, 1989 Precipitation fluctuations over global land areas since the late 1800s I Geophss Res , 94, 1 195 1210

Dickson, R R , J Mcincke, S A Malmberg and A J Lee, 1988 The great salinity anomaly in the northern North Atlantic, 1968-82 Piog Oceanogi ,20, 103 151

Druyan. L M , 1989 Advances in the study of Sub saharan drought Int I Climatol, 9 77-90

Eddy, J , 1976 The Maunder Minimum Science, 192, 1 1891202

Einarsson MA 1984 Climate of Iceland In Chapter 7 of Climate oj the Oceans, Woild Simes of Climatology, 15. H van Loon (Ed ), pp673 697

Ellsaesser, H W M C MacCracken, J J Walton, and S L Grotch, 1986 Global climatic trends as revealed by the recorded data Rex Gcophys ,24, 745 792

Elliott, W P ME Smith and J K Angell, 1990 On monitoring tropospheric water vapour changes using radiosonde data Proc Workshop on Greenhouse Gas Induced Climate Change, Amherst, MA, 8 12 May 1989, Elsevier , (in press)

Emanuel, K A , 1987 The dependence of hurricane intensity on climate Natuie, 326 483 485

Farmer, G , T M L Wigley, P D Jones and M Salmon, 1989 Documenting and explaining recent global mean temperature changes Climatic Research Unit, Norwich, Final Report to NERC, UK, Contract GR3/6565

Flohn, H , and A Kapala 1989 Changes tn tropical sea-air interaction processes over a 3()-year period Natiue, 338, 244246

Flohn, H , A Kapala HR Knoche and H Machel, 1990 Recent changes of the tiopical water and energy budget and of midlatitude circulations Submitted to Climate Dynamic s

Folland, C K , 1971 Day time temperature measurements on weathership Weather Reporter' Met Mag , 100, 6-14

Folland. C K , 1988 Numerical models of the raingauge exposure problem, field experiments and an improved collector design Q I Ros Met Sot 114, 1485-1516

Folland, C K and A W Colman, 1988 An interim analysis of the leading covariance eigenvectors of worldwide sea surface temperature anomalies for 1951-80 LRFC 20, available from National Meteorological Library, Meteorological Office, Bracknell, UK

Folland, C K , D E Parker and F E Kates, 1984 Worldwide marine temperature fluctuations 1856-1981 Natuie, 310, 670 673

Folland, C K , and D E Parker, 1989 Observed variations of sea surface temperature NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Climate Ocean Interaction, Oxford, UK, 26 30 Sept 1988 Kluwer Academic Press, pp 31 52

Folland, CK, J Owen, M N Waid and A Colman, 1990 Prediction of seasonal rainfall in the Sahel legion using empirical and dynamical methods / Foiecastmi’, (in piess)

Fu, C, and D Ye, 1988 The tropical very low liequency oscillation on interannual scale Ads Atmos Sa ,5, 369 388

Gadgil, SC, PV Joseph and NV Joshi, 1984 Oceanatmosphere coupling over monsoon legions Natuic, 312, 141 143

Gadgil, S , 1988 Recent advances in monsoon research with particular reference to the Indian Ocean Aust Met May , 36, 193-204

Gloersen, P , and W J Campbell, 1988 Variations in the Arctic Antarctic, and global sea ice covers during 1979-1987 as observed with the Nimbus 7 Scanning Multichannel Microwave Radiometer / Geophss Res , 93, 10,666-10.674

Gordon, N D , 1986 The Southern Oscillation and New Zealand weather Mon Weath Res ,114,371 387

Graham, N E , and T P Barnett, 1987 Sea surface temperature, surface wind divergence, and convection over tropical oceans Science, 238, 657-659

Gray, W M , 1984 Atlantic seasonal hurricane frequency Part 1 El Nino and 30mb quasi-bienmal oscillation influences Mon Weath Res , 112, 1649 1683

Gregory, S , 1989 The changing frequency of drought in India, 1871-1985 7 Geos’ , 155, 322 334

Groisman, P Ya , and V V Koknaeva, 1990 The influence ol urbanisation on the estimate ol the mean air temperature change in the 20th century over the USSR and USA territories obtained by State Hydrological Institute network Draft contribution to IPCC WGI, Section 7

Grove, AT, and A Warien, 1968 Quaternary landforms and climate on the south side of the Sahaia / Geos; 134,194-208

Grove, J M , 1988 1 he Little Ice Methuen London 498pp

Haeberli, W , P Mulle P Alean and H Bosch. 1989 Glacier changes following the Little Ice Age a survey of the international data bases and its perspectives In J Oerlemans (FA),Glaaei Lliiaiiations and Climate Cham’c.H 101

Hammer, C , 1977 Past volcanism revealed by Greenland Ice Sheet impurities Native, 270 482-486

Hansen, J E , A Lacis D Rind G Russell, P Stone I Fung R Rudy and J Lerner. 1984 Climate sensitivity analysis of leedback mechanisms In Climate Piocesses and Climate Sensitis its JE Hansen and T Takahashi (Eds) Gcophss Monos’! , 29, pp vm + 368, Washington

Hansen. J , and S Lebedeff, 1987 Global tiends ol measured surface air temperature / Geophss Res 92 13345 13372

Hansen. J , and S Lebedeff 1988 Global surlace tempeiatuies update through 1987 Geophss Res Lettei s, 15, 323 326

Hastenrath, S L , 1988 Climate and Cue illation m the Tiopic s Second edition Reidel, Dordrecht. 455pp

Helland-Hansen B , and F Nansen 1920 Temperature variations in the North Atlantic Ocean and in the atmosphere introductory studies on the cause of climatological vanations (Tianslated from German) Smithsonian Mist , Coll . 70(4) 408pp

Henderson-Sellers, A 1986 Cloud changes in a warmei Europe Chm C/w/igr, 8, 25-52

Henderson-Sellers, A , 1989 North American total cloud amount vanations this century Glob and Plana Change 1. 175 194

Hense A P Krahe and H Flohn, 1988 Recent fluctuations of troposphenc temperature and water vapoui content in the tropics I Meteoi Atmos Pliss 38,215-227

Huntley B , and I C Prentice. 1988 July tempeiatuies in Europe from pollen data 6000 years befoie present Science 241 687 690

Imbrie, J and K P Imbne. 1979 IceAi’es solsins; the msstas Macmillan, London 224pp

James, RW, and PT Fox, 1972 Comparative sea-surface tempeiature measurements Marine Science Affairs Repoit No 5, WMO 336, 27pp

Jones, PD, 1988 Hemisphenc surface air tempeiature variations recent trends and an update to 1987	/ Chm 1

654-660

Jones P D , 1989 The influence of ENSO on global temperatures Climate Momtoi, 17, 80-89

Jones, P D , P M Kelly. G B Goodess and T R Karl 1989 The effect of urban wanning on the Northcin Hemisphere temperature average / Chm ,2, 285 290

Jones. P D , S C B Raper, R S Bradley, H F Diaz P M Kelly and T M L Wigley, 1986a Northern Hemisphere surface air temperature variations, 1851 1984 J Chm Appl Met 25 161-179

Jones PD SCB Raper, R S Bradley, H F Diaz PM Kelly and T M L Wigley, 1986b Southern Hemisphere suilace an temperature variations, 1851-1984	/ Chm Appl Ma 25

1213-1230

Jones PD and TML Wigley, 1990 Satellite data undei scrutiny Natnie. 344 711

Karl. T R , G Kukla and J Gavin, 1984 Decreasing diurnal temperature range in the United States and Canada horn 1941 1980 I Chm Appt Met ,23, 1489 1504

Karl T R , C N Williams Jr and P J Young 1986 A model to estimate the time of observation bias associated with monthly mean maximum minimum and mean tempeiatuies lor the United States 7 Chm Appl Met 25, 145-160

Karl TR, and CN Williams, Jr, 1987 An appioach to adjusting climatological time series loi discontinuous inhomogeneities 7 Chm Appl Met .26. 1744 1763

Karl TR . 1988 Multi year fluctuations ol tempeiatuie and precipitation The gray areas of climate change C hm Clians’i 12 179 197

Karl, TR, HF Diaz and G Kukla 1988 Uibam/ation its detection and effect in the United States climate iecoid I Chm 1 1099 1123

Karl T R . J D 1 arpley. R G Quayle, H F Diaz D A Robinson and R S Bradley. 1989 The recent climate recoid What it can and cannot tell us Res Geophss ,27, 405 430

Karl, T R , and P M Steurer, 1990 Increased cloudiness in the United States during the first half of the twentieth centuiy Fact or fiction In Review, Geophs s Res Lett

Karl T R , and P D Jones, 1990 Reply to comments on Urban bias in area-averaged surface temperature trends Full Ama Met Sot , 71 , (in press)

Karoly, D J , 1989 Northern Hemisphere tempeiatuie trends A possible greenhouse gas effect ’ Gcophss Res Lett 16 465 468

Kleshchenko LK,VT Radiuhin and R N Khostova 1988 On the companson of Northern Hemispheie grid point mean

monthly air temperature archives Proceedings of VN1IGMI-WDC, 153, (in Russian)

Lachenbruch, A H , and B Vaughn Marshall 1986 Changing climate geothermal evidence fiom permafiost in the Alaskan Arctic Science, 234, 689 696

Lamb, H H , 1977 Climate Pi esent Past and Putin e Vol 2, Methuen

Lamb, H H , 1988 Climate and life during the Middle Ages, studied especially in the mountains of Europe In Weathei Climate and Human Affaii r Routledge, London, 40-74

Legates, D R , and C J Willmott, 1990 Mean sesonal and spatial variability in gauge corrected, global precipitation hit I Climatol, 10, 111 127

Levitus, S , 1989a Interpentadal variability of temperature and salinity at intermediate depths ol the Noith Atlantic Ocean 1970-74 versus 1955-59 J Geophss Res Oc cans, 94, 6091 6131

Levitus, S , 1989b Interpentadal variability of salinity in the upper 150m of the North Atlantic Ocean 1970-74 versus 1955 59 / Geophvs Res Oceans, 94, (in press)

Levitus, S , 1989c Interpentadal vailability of temperature and salinity in the deep North Atlantic Ocean, 1970 74 versus 1955 59 / Geophys Res Oceans, 94, 16125 16131

Levitus, S , 1989d Interpentadal variability of stenc sea level and geopotential thickness ot the North Atlantic Ocean 1970-74 versus 1955-59 / Geoplivs Res Oc eans, 94 , (in press)

Li CY, 1985 El Nino and typhoon activities in the westein Pacific Ke\ue r<>nghao,30, 1087 1089

Lind/en, R S , 1990 Some coolness concerning global warming Bull Am Met Soc ,71, 288-299

Lozhkin A B , and L H Vazhenin 1987 The features of the plant covei development in the Kolyma lowland in the Early Holocene In The Quatei naiv Pei tod in the Not th East of Asia Magadan

Madden R A , and J Williams 1978 The correlation between temperature and piecipitation in the United States and Europe Mon Weath Res , 106, 142 147

Makarevitch, KG, and OV Rototaeva, 1986 Present day fluctuations of mountain glaciers in the Northein Hemisphere Data of Glaciological Studies, Publ No 57, Soviet Geophysical Committee, Academy of Sciences of the USSR Moscow, 157 163

Makrogiannis, T J , A A Bloutsos and B D Giles, 1982 Zonal index and circulation change in the Noith Atlantic area, 1873 1972 J Climatol ,2, 159 169

Mass, C F and D A Portman, 1989 Majoi volcanic eruptions and climate a critical evaluation I Chm , 2, 566-593

Maury MF, 1858 Explanations and sailing directions to accompany the wind and cuirent chaits Vol 1, pp383 +51 plates W A Harris, Washington, DC

McGuffie, K , and A Henderson-Sellers, 1989a Almost a century of "imaging' clouds over the whole-sky dome Bull Amei Met Soc , 70, 1243-1253

McGuffie. K . and A Henderson Sellers, 1989b Is Canadian cloudiness increasing\ Atmos Ocean 26 608 633

Mechcherskava A V and V G Blazhevich 1977 Catalogues ol piecipitation and tempeiature anomalies loi basic agucultural regions of the southern part of the European

territory of the USSR, Northern Kazakhstan and West Siberia Meteotol i Gtdtolog , 9, 76 84

Michaels, PT, 1990 Regional 500mb heights prior to the radiosonde eia Theoiet and Appl C/twiar, (in press)

Miller, G H 1976 Anomalous local glacier activity, Baffin Island, Canada palaeo climatic implications Geology, 4, 502 504

McLaren, A S , 1989 The under ice thickness distnbution of the Aictic Basin as recorded in 1958 and 1970 J Geophvs Res , 94,4971 4983

Moses, T, GN Kiladis, HF Diaz and RG Barry, 1987 Charactei istics and frequency ot reversals in mean sea level pressure in the North Atlantic sector and their relationship to long term tempeiature trends / Climatol, 7, 13 30

Mysak, L A and D A Manak 1989 Arctic sea ice extent and anomalies, 1953-1984 Atmospheie Ocean, 21, 376-405

Namias J 1989 Cold winteis and hot summers Natuie, 338, 15-16

Nash, J and FJ Schmidlin, 1987 WMO International Radiosonde Companson (UK 1984, USA 1985) Final Report WMO Instiuments and Observing Methods Report No 30 WMO/TD No 195 103pp

Newell R E , and J W Kidson 1984 African mean wind changes between Sahelian wet and clty periods J Climatol, 4, 27 33

Newell, N E , R E Newell J Hsiung and Z-X Wu, 1989 Global marine temperature vanation and the solar magnetic cycle Geophss Res Lett ,16 311 314

Nicholls, N , 1984 The Southern Oscillation, sea surface tempeiature, and interannual fluctuations in Australian tropical cyclone activity / Climatol 4,661 670

Nicholson, S E 1989 Atncan drought characteristics, causal theories and global teleconnections Geophys Monogi ,52,79100

Nitta, T , and S Yamada, 1989 Recent warming of tropical sea surface temperature and its relationship to the Northern Hemispheie cnculation / Met Soc lapan, 67, 375 383

Oerlemans, J 1988 Simulation of historical glacier variations with a simple climate-glacier model / Glacial 34 333-341

Ogallo L J 1989 The spatial and temporal patterns of the East African seasonal lainfall denved fiom principal component analysis hit / Climatol 9, 145-167

Oort, AH Y -H Pan, R W Reynolds and C F Ropelewski, 1987 Historical trends in the surface temperature over the oceans based on the COADS Chm Dvnam , 2, 29-38

Pan, Y H , and A H Oort 1983 Global climate variations connected with sea suiface temperature anomalies in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean for the 1958-1973 period Mon Weath Res , 111. 1244 1258

Parker, D E , 1985 On the detection of temperature changes induced by increasing atmosphenc carbon dioxide Q I Roy Met Soc , 111, 587 601

Parker, DE, 1990 Effects of changing exposure of thermometers at land stations Draft contribution to 1PCC WGI, Section 7

Parthasarathy B and G B Pant 1985 Seasonal relationships between Indian summer monsoon rainfall and the Southern Oscillation / Climatol 5 369-378

Pat/elt, G 1989 Die 1980er Vorstossperiode dei Alpengletcher Oestci i etc he t Alpensei ein, 44 14-15

Peshy, A and A A Velichko, 1990 (Eds) Palaeo-chmatic and palaeo environment reconstruction from the late Pleistocene to Holocene In Palaeo c’eoipapltic Atlas foi the Neu them Hemtspheie Budapest (In press)

Pittock, A B , 1975 Climatic change and patterns of variation in Australian rainfall Seal i h, 6, 498-504

Pittock, A B , 1983 Solar variability, weather and climate an update Q J Roy Met Soi , 109, 23 55

Porter, S C , 1986 Pattern and forcing of Northern Hemisphere glacier variations during the last millennium Quat Res , 26(1), 27-48

Quinn, WH, VT Neal and S E Antunez de Mayolo, 1987 El Nino occurrences over the past four and a half centuries / Geophss Res, 92, 14449 14462

Ramanathan, V , R D Cess, E F Harrison, P Minnis, B R Barkstrom, E Ahmad and D Hartman, 1989 Cloud-radiative forcing and climate results from the Earth Radiation Budget Expeiiment Science 243 57 63

Raper, S C B, 1990 Observational data on the relationships between climatic change and the frequency and magnitude of severe tropical stoims In Climate and sea les el change Obseisations, Projections Implications RA Warrick and T M L Wigley (Eds), Cambridge University Press (in press) Rasmusson, EM, and TH Carpenter, 1982 Variations in tropical sea surface temperature and surface wind fields associated with the Southern Oscillation/El Nino Mon Weath Res , 110, 354-384

Revell, CG, and SW Gaulter, 1986 South Pacific tropical cyclones and the Southern Oscillation Mon Weath Res 114, 1138-1145

Rind, D , D Peteet W Broecker, A McIntyre and W F Ruddiman, 1986 The impact of cold North Atlantic sea surface temperatures on climate implications for the Younger Dryas cooling (11 10K) Chm Dsnam , 1, 3-33

Robi nson, DA, and KF Dewey, 1990 Recent secular variations in the extent of Northein Hemisphere snow cover Submitted to Natm e

Roemmich, D , and C Wunsch, 1984 Apparent changes in the climatic state of the deep North Atlantic Ocean Natm e, 307, 447-450

Rogers, J C , 1985 Atmospheric circulation changes associated with the warming ovei the Noithern North Atlantic in the 1920s J Clim Appl Met , 24, 1303-1310

Ropelewski, CF, 1983 Spatial and tempoial variations in Antarctic sea ice (1973 1982) / Chm Appl Met, 22 470-473 Ropelewski, C F , and M S Halpert 1987 Global and regional scale precipitation patterns associated with the El Nifio/Southern Oscillation Mon Weath Res ,115, 1606-1626 Ropelewski, C F , and P D Jones, 1987 An extension of the Tahiti-Darwin Southern Oscillation Index Mon Weath Res , 115,2161 2165

Rossby, C G , 1959 Current problems in meteorology In The Atmosphet e and Sea tn Motion, Rockefeller Institute Press, New York, pp9-50

Rossow, W B , 1989 Measuring cloud pioperties from space a review / Chm, 2, 201 213

Salinger, MJ, 1981 New Zealand climate The instrumental recoid Victoria University of Wellington, 327pp

Salinger, M J 1989 New Zealand climate horn ice age to present Envnonmental Monitoring in New Zealand 32 40

Schonwiese, C D , and W Birrong, 1990 European piecipitation trend statistics 1851 1980 including multivariate assessments of the anthropogenic CO? signal Z Metecnol 40 92 98

Scialdone, J, and A Robock, 1987 Comparisons of northern hemisphere snow cover data sets I Chm Appl Met 26 53 68

SCOPE 29, 1986 I he c>i eenhouse effect climatic change and ecosystems B Bolin, BR Doos J Jagei and R W Wairick (Eds) Wiley, Chichester

Sellers, W D , and W Liu, 1988 Temperatuie patterns and tiends in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere / Chm 1 573 581

Semazzi, F H M , V Mehta and Y C Sud 1988 An investigation of the relationship between Sub saharan rainfall and global sea surface tempeiatuies Atmosplieie-Ocean 26 118 138

Sesruk, B , 1982 Methods of correcting foi systematic eiroi in point precipitation measurement foi operational use Opeiational Hscholoijs Report No 21, WMO No 589

Singh, G , R D Joshi, S K Chopra and A B Singh, 1974 Late quaternaiy history of vegetation and climate of the Rajasthan Desert India Phil Tians Ros Soi Land Senes B 267, 179 195

Sommerville, RJ, and LA Remer, 1984 Cloud optical thickness feedbacks in the CCh climate problem / Geophss Res , 89, 9668 9672

Spencer, R W , and J R Christy, 1990 Precise monitoring of global temperature trends from satellites Science, 247 1558 1562

Street-Perrott, F A and S P Harrison, 1985 Lake levels and climate reconstruction In Palaeo climate Analysis and Modehm>, (Ed ) A Hecht J Wiley, New York, pp291 340

Street-Perrott, FA, and RA Perrott 1990 Abrupt climate fluctuations in the tropics The influence of the Atlantic cnculation Natm e, 343, 607 612

Sturman, AP, and MR Andeison, 1985 A comparison of Antarctic sea ice data sets and mleried trends in ice area I Chm Appl Met , 24, 275 280

Swain, A M JE Kutzbach and S Hasteniath 1983 Estimates of Holocene precipitation for Rajasthan India based on pollen and lake level data Qtiatein Res 19 1 17

S/e, G , F Drake, M Desbois and A Hendeison Selleis 1986 Total and low cloud amounts ovei France and Southern Britain in the summer of 1983 comparison of surface observed and satellite retrieved values hit / Rem Sens 7 1031 1050

Toynbee H 1874 Appendix D of Report of Pioc Conf

Maritime Meteorology, London, 1874 HMSO

Trenberth, K E , 1976 Fluctuations and trends m indices of the Southern Hemispheric circulation QI Ros Met Sot 102 65-75

Trenberth, K E GW Bianstator and P A Aikin 1988 Oiigms of the 1988 Noith American Drought Science 242 1640 1645

Trenberth, K E , and D J Shea 1987 On the evolution ol the Southern Oscillation Mon Weath Res 115 3078 3096

Trenberth KE JR Christy and J G Olson 1987 Global atmospheric mass surface piessure and walei vapoui variations / Geophss Res,92 14 815-14 826

'Irenberth, KE 1990 Recent obseived mterdecadal climate changes tn the Northern Hemisphere Bull Am Met Soc , 71 (m press)

van Heerden, J , D E Terblanche and G C Schultze, 1988 The Southern Oscillation and South African summer rainfall 1 Climatol, 8, 577-598

van Loon, H and J C Rogers, 1978 The seesaw in winter temperature between Greenland and northern Europe Part 1 General description Mon Weath Res , 106,296-310

van Loon, H , and J Williams, 1976 The connection between trends of mean temperature and circulation at the surface Pt I Winter Mon Weath Rex , 104, 365-380

van Loon, H , and K Labitzke 1988 Association between the 11 year solar cycle, the QBO and the atmosphere Part II Surface and 700mb in the Northein Hemisphere winter J Climate, 1, 905-920

Varushchenko S I , A N Varushchenko and R K Klige, 1980 Changes in the Caspian Sea legime and < losed h atei bodic s in palaeotimes M Nauka, 238pp

Velichko A A , M P Grichuk, E E Guitovaya. E M Zelikson and O K Borisova, 1982 Palaeo-climatic reconstructions for the optimum of the Mikulino Interglacial in Europe Izv Acad Sci USSR, Sei Geogi , Nl, 15

Velichko A A,MP Grichuk, E E Guitovaya and E M Zelikson 1983 Palaeo-climate of the USSR terntory dunng the optimum ot the last interglacial (Mikulino) Izv Acad Sci USSR, Sei Geoi’i N 1,5-18

Velichko A A , M S Barash, M P Grichuk Ye Ye Gurtoyova and E M Zelikson, 1984 Climate ol the Northern Hemispheie in the last interglacial (Mikulino) Izv Acad Sci USSR, Sei Geogi N6, 30-45

Vinnikov, K Ya , P Ya Groisman, and K M Lugina, 1990 The empirical data on modern global climate changes (temperature and precipitation) / Chm , (in piess)

Vinnikov, K Ya , P Ya Groisman, KM Lugina, and A A Golubev, 1987 Variations in Noithern Hemispheie mean surface air temperature over 1881 1985 Metecn ologs and Hscbologs, 1,45 53 (In Russian)

Wadhams, P, MA Lange and SF Ackley, 1987 The ice thickness distibution across the Atlantic sectoi of the Antarctic Ocean in midwinter I Geophss Res , 92, 14535 14552

Wadhams, P . 1989 Sea-ice thickness distribution in the Tians Polai Drift Stream Rapp P v Reun Cons hit Esploi Mei 188, 59-65

Wadhams, P , 1990 Evidence foi thinning of the Arctic sea ice covei north oi Greenland Naime . (in press)

Walker, G T , and E W Bliss, 1932, World Weather Vol Mem Ros Met Soc , 4, 53-84

Wallace, J M , and D S Gutzler, 1981 Teleconnections in the geopotential height field during the Northern Hemisphere winter Mon Weatli Res , 109,784 812

Wallen, C C , 1986 Impact of present century climate fluctuations in the Northern Hemisphere Geogi aj Ann , Ser A 68.245-278

Walsh JE and JE Sater. 1981 Monthly and seasonal vai lability in the ocean-ice-atmosphere systems of the North Pacific and the North Atlantic / Geophss Res 86 74257445

Wang W C , Z Zeng, and T R Karl, 1990 Urban warming in

China Draft contribution to IPCC WG1, Section 7

Warren, S G , C J Hahn, J London, R M Chervin and R L Jenne, 1988 Global distribution ot total cloud cover and cloud type amounts over the ocean NCAR Tech Note TN 317+STR, 42pp

Webb, T III, P J Bartiein and JE Kutzbach, 1987 Climatic change in eastern North America during the past 18000 years comparisons of pollen data with model results In The Geology of Ninth Amenia, Vol K 3, North America and Adjacent Oceans During the Last Deglaciation (eds W F Ruddiman and H E Wright) Geol Soc of America, Boulder, pp447-462

Wiesnet, D R , C F Ropelewski G J Kukla, and D A Robinson, 1987 A discussion of the accuracy of NOAA satellite-derived global seasonal snow covei measurements In B E Goodison, RG Bariy, and J Dozier, (Eds), Lai ge Scale Effects of Seasonal Snow Cose), IAHS Publ 166, pp291 304 IAHS Piess, Wallingford, UK

Wigley, TML, and PM Kelly, 1989 Holocene climatic change, 14C wiggles and variations in solar irradiance Phil Tians Ros Soc Lond , (in press)

Wolter, K 1989 Modes of tropical circulation, Southern Oscillation and Sahel rainfall anomalies / Chm , 2, 149-172

Wolter K and S Hastenrath, 1989 Annual Cycle and Long-

Teirn Trends of Circulation and Climate Variability over the Tropical Oceans J Chm, 2, 1329 1351

Wood, F B , 1988 Global alpine glacier trends, 1960s to 1980s Ant Alp Res ,20, 404-413

Woodruff, S D , R J Slutz, R J Jenne, and P M Steurer, 1987 A Comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set Bull Am Met Soc ,68, 1239 1250

Woodruff, S D , 1990 Preliminary comparison of COADS (US) and MDB (UK) ship reports Draft contribution to IPCC WG1, Section 7

Yamamoto, R M , R M Hoshaio and N Nishi, 1990a An estimate of systematic errors in air temperature data tn COADS I Chm , (in press)

Yamamoto, R M , R M Hoshaio, N Nishi and Y Kakuno, 1990b Interdecadal warming over the oceans J Chm , (in press)

Yoshino, M M , 1978 Regionally of climatic change in Monsoon Asia In Climatic change and food pi oduction K Takahashi and M M Yoshino (Eds), Univ Tokyo Press Tokyo, 331 342

Yoshino, M M , 1990 Climate related impact research activities-Japan Int Networkshop, Boulder, Co, March 14 17, 1989, (tn press)

Yoshino, M M . and K Urushibara, 1978 Palaeoclimate tn Japan since the Last Ice Age Climatological Notes, 22, 1-24

Zebiak, S E , and M A Cane, 1987 A model El Nino—Southern Oscillation Mon Weath Res ,115,2262-2278

Zhang, C , J Yang and Lin, X , 1983 The stages nature of longterm variations of the atmospheric centres of action Set Atmos Simca 7 364 374

Zhang, Y and W C Wang, 1990 The surface temperature in China dui mg the rmd-Holocene In Zhu Kezhen Centennial Memonal Collections Science Press, Beijing, (in press)

Zubakov, V A , and I I Borzenkova, 1990 Global Climate dm mg the Cenozoic Amstcidam, Elsevier, 453pp

8

Detection of the Greenhouse Effect in the Observations

T.M.L. WIGLEY, T.P. BARNETT

Contributors:

T.L. Bell; P. Bloomfield; D. Brillinger; W. Degefu; C.K. Folland; S. Gadgil;

G.S. Golitsyn; J.E. Hansen; K. Hasselmann; Y. Hayashi; P.D. Jones; DJ. Karoly;

R.W. Katz; M.C. MacCracken; R.L. Madden; S. Manabe; J.F.B. Mitchell; A.D. Moura;

C.	Nobre; L.J. Ogallo; E.O. Oladipo; D.E. Parker; A.B. Pittock; S.C.B. Raper;

B.D. Santer; M.E. Schlesinger; C.-D. Schonwiese; CJ.E. Schuurmans; A. Solow;

K.E. Trenberth; K.Ya. Vinnikov; W.M. Washington; T. Yasunari; D. Ye; W. Zwiers.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary	243

8.1	Introduction	245

8.1.1	The Issue	245

8.1.2	The Meaning of "Detection"	245

8.1.3	Consistency of the Observed Global-Mean

Warming with the Greenhouse Hypothesis	245

8.1.4	Attribution and the Fingerprint Method	247

8.2	Detection Strategies	248

8.2.1	Choosing Detection Variables	248

8.2.1.1	Signal-to-noise ratios	248

8.2.1.2	Signal uncertainties	248

8.2.1.3	Noise uncertainties	248

8.2.1.4	Observed data availability	249

8.2.2	Univariate Detection Methods	249

8.2.3	Evaluation of Recent Climate Changes	249

8.2.3.1	Increase of global-mean temperature	249

8.2.3.2	Enhanced high-latitude warming, particularly

in the winter half-year	250

8.2.3.3	Tropospheric warming and stratospheric

cooling	251

8.2.3.4	Global-mean precipitation increase	251

8.2.3.5	Sea level rise	251

8.2.3.6	Tropospheric water vapour increase	251

8.3	Multivariate or Fingerprint Methods	252

8.3.1	Conspectus	252

8.3.2	Comparing Changes in Means and Variances	252

8.3.3	Pattern Correlation Methods	252

8.4	When Will the Greenhouse Effect be Detected ?	253

8.5	Conclusions	254

References	254

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Global-mean temperature has increased by 0 3-0 6°C over the past 100 years The magnitude of this warming is broadly consistent with the theoretical predictions of climate models, but it remains to be established that the observed warming (or part of it) can be attributed to the enhanced greenhouse effect This is the detection issue

If the sole cause ol the warming were the Man-induced greenhouse effect, then the implied climate sensitivity would be near the lower end of the accepted range of model predictions Natural variability of the climate system could be as large as the changes observed to date but there are insufficient data to be able to estimate its magnitude or its sign If a significant fraction of the observed warming were due to natural variability, then the implied climate sensitivity would be even lower than model predictions However it is possible that a larger greenhouse warming has been offset paitially by natural variability and other factors, in which case the climate sensitivity could be at the high end of model predictions

Global-mean temperature alone is an inadequate indicator of greenhouse-gas-induced climatic change Identifying the causes of any global-mean temperature change requires examination of other aspects of the changing climate, particularly its spatial and temporal characteristics Currently, there is only limited agreement between model predictions and observations Reasons for this include the fact that climate models are still in an early stage of development, our inadequate knowledge of natural

variability and other possible anthropogenic effects on climate, and the scarcity of suitable observational data, particularly long, reliable time series An equally important problem is that the appropriate experiments, in which a realistic model of the global climate system is forced with the known past history of greenhouse gas concentration changes, have not yet been performed

Improved prospects for detection requne a long teim commitment to comprehensively monitoring the global climate system and potential climate forcing factors and to reducing model uncertainties In addition there is consideiable scope for the refinement of the statistical methods used for detection We therefore recommend that a compiehensive detection strategy be formulated and implemented in order to improve the prospects for detection This could be facilitated by the setting up of a fully integrated international climate change detection panel to coordinate model experiments and data collection eftorts directed towards the detection problem

Quantitative detection of the enhanced greenhouse effect using objective means is a vital research area, because it is closely linked to the reduction of uncertainties in the magnitude of the effect and will lead to increased confidence in model projections The fact that we are unable to reliably detect the predicted signals today does not mean that the greenhouse theory is wiong or that it will not be a serious problem for mankind in the decades ahead

8.1	Introduction

8.1.1	The Issue

This chapter addresses the question Have we detected the greenhouse effect’ , or, stated more correctly, have we detected changes in climate that can, with high statistical confidence, be attributed to the enhanced greenhouse effect associated with increasing trace gas concentrations9 It is important to answer this question, because detecting the enhanced greenhouse effect will provide direct validation of models of the global climate system Until we can identify aspects of greenhouse gas induced changes in the observed climate record with high confidence, there will always be doubts about model validity and hence about even the most general predictions of future climatic change Even when detection has occurred uncertainties regarding the magnitude and spatial details of futuie changes will still remain

Previous reviews of the greenhouse problem (N R C 1983, MacCracken and Luther, 1985 Bolin ct al 1986) have also addressed the detection issue They have concluded that the enhanced greenhouse effect has not yet been detected unequivocally in the observational record However, they have also noted that the global mean temperature change over the past 100 years is consistent with the greenhouse hypothesis, and that theie is no convincing observational evidence to suggest that the model-based range of possible climate sensitivity 1 values is wrong The purpose ol the present review is to re evaluate these conclusions in the light of more recent evidence

8.1.2	The Meaning Of "Detection "

The word "detection has been used to leler to the identification of a significant change in climate (such as an upward trend in global mean temperature) However identifying a change in climate is not enough for us to claim that we have detected the enhanced gieenhouse effect, even if statistical methods suggest that the change is statistically significant (1 e extremely unlikely to have occurred by chance) To claim detection in a uselui and practical way, we must not only identify a climatic change, but we must attribute at least part of such a change to the enhanced greenhouse effect It is in this stricter sense that the word "detection is used here Detection requires that the observed changes in climate are in accord with detailed model predictions of the enhanced greenhouse effect, demonstrating that we understand the cause or causes of the changes

1 Climate sensitis its is defined het e as the equilibi mm

global-mean tempeiatuie change foi a CO2 doubling

(AT2O AT2i is thought to lie in the icinge 1 5°C to

4 5 °C (see Section 5)

To illustrate this important difference consider changes in global-mean temperature A number ol recent analyses have claimed to show a statistically significant warming trend over the past 100 years (Hansen et al 1988 Tsionis and Elsner, 1989, Wigley and Raper 1990) But is this warming trend due to the enhanced greenhouse effect ’ Wc have strong evidence that changes of similar magnitude and rate have occurred prior to this century (see Section 7) Since these changes were certainly not due to the enhanced greenhouse effect, it might be argued that the most ieccni changes merely represent a natuial long-timc-scak fluctuation

The detection problem can be conveniently described in terms of the concepts of signal and noise (Madden and Ramanathan 1980) Here the signal is the predicted time dependent climate response to the enhanced greenhouse effect The noise is any climatic variation that is not due to the enhanced greenhouse effect 1 2 * 4 Detection requires that the observed signal is large relative to the noise In addition in order to be able to attribute the detected signal to the enhanced greenhouse effect it should be one that is specific to this particular cause Global mean warming loi example is not a particularly good signal in this sense because there are many possible causes of such warming

8.1.3	Consistency Of The Observed Global-Mean Warming With The Greenhouse Hypothesis

Global-mean temperature has mcieased by around 0 30 6°C over the past 80-100 years (see Section 7) At the same time, greenhouse gas concentrations have mcieased substantially (Section 1) Is the warming consistent with these increases’ To answer this question we must model the effects of these concentration changes on global-mean temperature and compaie the results with the obseivations Because of computing constraints and because of the relative inflexibility of coupled ocean atmospheie GCMs we cannot use such models for this put pose Instead we must use an upwelling-diffusion climate model to account foi damping or lag cflect of the oceans (see Section 6) The response of such a model is deteimined mainly by the climate sensitivity (AT2\) the magnitude ol ocean mixing (specified by a diffusion coefficient K) and the latio ol the temperature change in the regions ol sinking watei relative to the global-mean change (7t) Uncertainties in these parameters can be accounted for by using a iange of \ allies

2 Noise as used line includes sanations that might be due to othei antluopogenic effects (sec Section 2) and natm al 1 ai lability Natin al 1 co lability 1 c fei s to al! natm al c limatu 1 ai muons that ai e urn c late d to Man s actisitie \ cmbiacing both the effects of c sternal fon mg factois (such as sola) actis its and sohanic eiuptions) and mte 1 nails gent 1 cited 1 ai lability I ncci tamtie s in the obsc 11 ations also c onstitute a foi m of noise

Figure 8.1: Observed global-mean temperatuie changes (1861 1989) compaied with predicted values The observed changes are as given in Section 7 smoothed to show the decadal and longer time scale trends more cleaily Predictions are based on observed concentiation changes and concentiation/forcing lelationships given in Section 2 and have been calculated using the upwelling diffusion climate model of Wigley and Raper (1987) To provide a common iefeience level modelled and observed data have been adjusted to have zero mean over 1861 1900 To illustrate the sensitivity to model parameters model results are shown for AT2X =1,2, 3 4 and 5°C (all panels) and for four K, 7t combinations The top left panel uses the values recommended in Section 6 (K = 0 63cm2sec *, n =1) Since sensitivity to K is relatively small and sensitivity to 7t is small for small AT2X, the best fit AT2X depends little on the choice of K and 7i

—1—1—1—1—1—1—1—1-  - K = 1.27, ?r = 1	“1	1—I—1—
-	“3
—	/
-	AT2X — 5/
-	
-	//3?  /// / r
	
	p-
	
f\ /\	
i i I i l i i i	-1—1	1	1	

The model is forced from 1765-1990 using concentration changes and radiative forcing/concentration relationships given tn Section 2

Figure 8 1 compares model predictions toi various model parameter values with the observed warming ovei 1861-1989 The model results are clearly qualitatively

consistent with the observations on the century time-scale Agreement on long time-scales is about all that one might expect On shorter time-scales, we know that the climate system is subject to internal variability and to a variety of external forcings, which must obscure any response to greenhouse forcing Although we cannot explain the

observed shorter time-scale fluctuations in detail, their magnitude is compatible with our undei standing oi natural climatic variability Essentially, they reflect the noise against which the greenhouse signal has to be detected

While the decadal time-scale noise is clear, there may also be substantial century time-scale noise This noise makes it difficult to inter a value of the climate sensitivity from Figure 8 1 Internal variability arising horn the modulation of random atmospheric disturbances by the ocean (Hasselmann, 1976) may produce warming or cooling trends of up to 0 3°C per century (Wigley and Raper, 1990, see Figure 8 2), while ocean circulation changes and the effects of other external forcing factors such as volcanic eruptions and solar irradiance changes

Figure 8.2: Simulated natural variability ot global mean temperature The upper panel shows results from the 100 year control run with the coupled ocean/atmosphere GCM of Stouffer et al (1989) These data are also shown in Figure 6 2 The lower two panels are 100 year sections from a 100 000 year simulation using the upwelling-diffusion model employed m Figure 8 1 with the same climate sensitivity as the Stouffer et al model (ATsx = 4°C) The upwelling diffusion model is forced with random inter annual radiative changes chosen to match observed inter annual variations in global-mean temperature (Wigley and Raper 1990) The consequent low frequency variability arises due to the modulating effect of oceanic thermal inertia Most 100 yeai sections are similar in chaiactei to the middle panel and are qualitatively indistinguishable from the coupled ocean/atmospheie GCM results However a significant fraction show century time scale trends as Luge oi laigei than that in the lower panel Longer GCM simulations may therefore 1 eveal similar centuiy time scale vai lability

and/or other anthropogenic factors (see Section 2) could produce trends of similar magnitude On time-scales ol order a decade, some of these (volcanic eruptions sulphate aerosol derived cloud albedo changes) clearly have a negative forcing effect, while others have uncertain sign 11 the net century time-scale effect of all these non greenhouse factors were close to zero, the climate sensitivity value implied by Figure 8 1 would be in the range 1 °C to 2°C If their combined effect were a warming then the implied sensitivity would be less than 1°C, while if it were a cooling the implied sensitivity could be largei than 4°C The range of uncertainty in the value ol the sensitivity becomes even larger if uncertainties in the observed data (Section 7) are accounted for

From this discussion, one may conclude that an enhanced greenhouse effect could already be present in the climate record, even though it cannot yet be reliably detected above the noise of natural climatic vailability The goal of any detection strategy must be to achieve much more than this It must seek to establish the credibility ol the models within relatively narrow limits and to reduce our uncertainty in the value of the climate sensitivity parameter In this regard, global-mean temperature alone is an inadequate indicator of greenhouse gas induced climatic change Identifying the causes of any global-mean temperature change requires examination of other aspects of the changing climate, particularly its spatial and temporal characteristics

8.1.4	Attribution And The Fingerprint Method

Given our rudimentary understanding of the magnitude and causes of low-frequency natural variability it is virtually impossible to demonstrate a cause-effect lclalionship with high confidence from studies of a single vanablc (However, if the global warming becomes sufficiently large, we will eventually be able to claim detection simpl) because there will be no other possible explanation) Linking cause and effect is reteired to as attribution This is the key issue in detection studies - we must be able to attribute the observed changes (or part of them) to the enhanced greenhouse effect Confidence in the altubution is increased as predictions of changes in various components of the climate system aie borne out by the observed data in more and more detail The method proposed for this purpose is the fingerprint method namely, identification of an observed multivai late signal ’ that has a structure unique to the predicted enhanced greenhouse effect (Madden and Ramanathan 1980 Baker and Barnett, 1982, MacCracken and Moses 1982) The

’ A nuiltisai late signal could he chani>i s tn a single

c lunate element (sue h as tempeiatm c) at mans plat < s <n les els m the atmosphei e oi changes tn a numhci of different elements oi chamtes in diffcicnt dements at diffeient places

current scientific focus in the detection issue is thcrefoie on multivariate or fingerprint analyses The lingerprint method is essentially a form of model validation, wheie the perturbation experiment that is being used to test the models is the currently uncontrolled emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere The method is discussed further in Section 8 3 First, however, we consider some of the more general issues of a detection strategy

8.2	Detection Strategies

8.2.1	Choosing Detection Variables

There are many possible climate elements or sets of elements that we could study to try to detect an enhanced greenhouse effect In choosing the ones to study, the following issues must be considered

the strength of the predicted signal and the ease with which it may be distinguished from the noise,

uncertainties in both the predicted signal and the noise, and

the availability and quality of suitable observed data

8	2 11 Signal to noise latios

The signal-to-noise ratio provides a convenient criterion for ranking different possible detection variables The stronger the predicted signal relative to the noise, the better the variable will be for detection purposes, all other things being equal For multivariate signals, those for which the pattern of natural variability is distinctly different from the pattern of the predicted signal will automatically have a high signal-to noise ratio

Signal to-noisc ratios have been calculated for a number of individual climate elements from the results of lxCCb and 2xC0t equilibrium experiments using atmospheric GCMs coupled to mixed-layei oceans (Bainctt and Schlesinger 1987, Santer et al , 1990 Schlesinger et al 1990) The highest values were obtained for lree troposphere temperatures, near-surface tempeiatures (including sea-surface temperatures), and lower to middle tropospheric water vapour content (especially in tropical regions) Lowest values were lound for mean sea level pressure and precipitation While these results may be model dependent, they do provide a useful preliminary indicator of the relative values of different elements in the detection context

Variables with distinctly diffeient signal and noise patterns may be difficult to find (Barnett and Schlesinger, 1987) There are reasons to expect parallels between the signal and the low-frequency noise patterns at least at the zonal and seasonal levels, simply because such char actenstics anse through feedback mechanisms that are common to both greenhouse forcing and natural variability

82 12 Signal line ei tamties

Clearly a vanable foi which the signal is highly uncertain cannot be a good candidate as a detection variable Predicted signals depend on the models used to produce them Model-to-model differences (Section 5) point strongly to laige signal uncertainties Some insights into these uncertainties may also be gamed from studies of model results in attempting to simulate the present-day climate (see Section 4) A poor representation of the present climate would indicate greater uncertainty in the predicted signal (e g , Mitchell et al , 1987) Such uncertainties tend to be largest at the regional scale because the processes that act on these scales are not accurately represented or paiameterized in the models Even if a particular model is able to simulate the present-day climate well, it will still be difficult to estimate how well it can define an enhanced greenhouse signal Nevertheless, validations of simulations ol the present global climate should form at least one of the bases for the selection of detection variables

A source of unceitainty heie is the difference between the results of equilibrium and transient experiments (see Section 6) Studies using coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs and time-varying CCb foicing have shown reduced warming in the aieas of deep water formation (i e , the North Atlantic basin and around Antarctica) compared with equilibrium results (Bryan et al , 1988, Washington and Meehl, 1989, Stouffer et al , 1989) These experiments suggest that the regional patterns of temperature change may be more complex than those predicted by equilibrium simulations The results ol equilibrium experiments must therefore be considered as only a guide to possible signal structuie

The most reliable signals aie likely to be those related to the largest spatial scales Small-scale details may be eliminated by spatial averaging, or, more generally by using filters that pass only the larger scale (low wave number) components (Note that some relatively smallscale features may be appropriate for detection purposes, if model confidence is high ) An additional benefit of spatial averaging or filtenng is that it results in data compression (i e , reducing the dimensionality of the detection vanable), which facilitates statistical testing Data compression may also be achieved by using linear combinations of variables (e g , Bell, 1982, 1986, Kaioly, 1987, 1989)

82 13 Noise uncei tamties

Since the expected man-made climatic changes occur on decadal and longer time-scales, it is largely the low-lrequency characteristics of natural variability that are important in defining the noise Estimating the magnitude of low frequency variability presents a major problem because of the shoitness and incompleteness of most

instrumental records This problem applies particularly to new satellite-based data sets

In the absence ol long data senes, statistical methods may be used to estimate the low frequency variability (Madden and Ramanathan, 1980, Wigley and Jones, 1981), but these methods depend on assumptions which introduce their own uncertainties (Thiebaux and Zwiers, 1984) The difficulty arises because most climatological time-senes show considerable persistence, in that successive yearly values are not independent, but often significantly correlated Serially correlated data show enhanced low frequency variability which can be difficult to quantily

As an alternative to statistically-based estimates, model simulations may be used to estimate the low-frequency variability, either tor single variables such as global-mean temperature (Robock, 1978, Hansen et al , 1988, Wigley and Raper, 1990) or for the full three-dimensional character of the climate system (using long simulations with coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs such as that of Stouffer et al , 1989) Internally-generated changes in global-mean temperature based on model simulations are shown in Figure 8 2

82 14 Obsetved data availability

The final, but certainly not the least important factor in choosing detection variables is data availability This is a severe constraint foi at least two reasons, the definition of an evolving signal and the quantification of the low-frequency noise Both iequire adequate spatial coverage and long record lengths, commodities that are rarely available Even for surface vanables global scale data sets have only recently become available (see Section 7) Useful upper air data extend back only to the 1950s and extend above 50mb (i e , into the lowei stratosphere) only in recent years Comprehensive three-dimensional coverage of most variables has become available only recently with the assimilation of satellite data into model-based analysis schemes Because such data sets are produced for meteorological purposes (e g model initialisation), not for climatic purposes such as long-term trend detection, they contain residual inhomogeneities due to changes in instrumentation and iiequent changes in the analysis schemes In short, we have very few adequately observed data variables with which to conduct detection studies It is important therefore to ensure that existing data senes are continued and observational programmes are maintained in ways that ensure the homogeneity of meteorological records

8.2.2	Univariate Detection Methods

X convenient way to classify detection studies carried out to date is in terms of the number of elements (oi vanables) considered, 1 e , as umvanate or multivanate studies The key characteristic ol the fonnei is that the detection

variable is a single time series Almost all published univariate studies have used tempeiatuie averaged over a large area as the detection parametei A cential pioblem in such studies is defining the noise level i e , the low ircquency variability (see 8 2 13)

There have been a number of published variations on the univariate detection theme One such has been icfened to as the noise reduction method In this method the effectsol other external forcing factors such as volcanic activity and/or solar irradiance changes or internal factors such as ENSO are removed from the record in some deteimimstic (i e , model-based) or statistical way (Hansen et al 1981 Gilliland 1982 Vinnikov and Groisman 1982 Gilliland and Schneider. 1984 Schonwicse 1990) This method is fraught with uncertainty because the history ol past forcings is not well known Theic are no dnect observations of these forcing factois and they have been inferred in a variety of different ways leading to a number of different forcing histones (Wigley et al 1985 Schonwiese, 1990) The noise reduction pnnciple however, is important Continued monitoring ol any of the factors that might influence global climate in a deterministic way (solar irradiance, stratospheric and tropospheric aerosol concentrations, etc ) can make a significant contribution to facilitating detection in the future

As noted above in the case of global-mean temperature univariate detection methods suffer because they consider change in only one aspect of the climate system Change in a single element could result from a variety of causes making it difficult to attribute such a change specifically to the enhanced greenhouse effect Nevertheless it is useful to review recent changes in a number of variables in the light of current model picdictions (see also Wood 1990)

8.2.3	Evaluation Of Recent Climate Changes

8 2 3 1 Inc i ease of global mean tenipc i atm c

The primary response oi the climate system to incieasing greenhouse gas concentrations is expected to be a global-mean waiming of the lower layers of the atmospheie In Section 8 13 the observed global mean waiming oi 0 30 6°C ovei the past century or so was compared with model predictions It was noted that the obscivcd waiming is compatible with the enhanced greenhouse hypothesis but that we could not claim to have detected the giecnhouse effect on this basis alone It was also noted that the dnectly implied climate sensitivity (i e the value of Al2\) was at the low end of the expected range, but that the plethora of uncertainties surrounding an empirical estimation of AT2\ piecludes us drawing any firm quantitative conclusions The observed global warming is far liom being a steady monotonic upward trend but this does not mean that uc should ieject the giecnhouse hypothesis Indeed although oui undeistanding oi natural climatic xailability is still

quite limited, one would certainly expect substantial natural fluctuations to be superimposed on any greenhouse-related warming trend

8 2 3 2 Enhanced hiqh-latitude waiminq paiticidaily in the m intei half-yeat

Most model simulations suggest that the warming north of 50°N in the winter half of the year should be enhanced due to feedback effects associated with sea-ice and snow cover (Manabe and Stouffer, 1980, Robock, 1983, Ingram et al, 1989) In the Southern Hemisphere, results from simulations with atmospheric GCMs coupled to ocean GCMs do not show this enhancement (Bryan et al , 1988, Washington and Meehl, 1989, Stouflci et al , 1989) Figures 8 3 and 8 4 show observed annual and winter temperature changes for various latitude bands Over the past 100 years, high northern latitudes have warmed slightly more than the global mean, but only in winter and spring Since the 1920s, however, the annual-mean temperature for the area north of 50°N shows almost no trend, except in recent years Summer and autumn temperatures have actually cooled since the mid to late

Figure 8.3: Observed variations in annual mean temperature for various latitude bands The temperatures used are air temperature data over land areas and sea-surface temperature data tor the oceans as described in Section 7 The smooth curves aie filtered values designed to show decadal and longer time scale trends more clearly

Figure 8.4: Observed variations in winter temperature for various latitude bands (DJF dated by the January in the Northern Hemisphere and tropics, and JJA in the Southern Hemisphere) The temperatures used are air temperature data over land areas and sea-surface temperature data for the oceans, as described in Section 7 The smooth curves are filtered values designed to show decadal and longer time scale trends more clearly Note the compressed scale in the upper panel

1930s High-latitudc Southern Hemisphere data are inadequate to make any meaningful comparisons

The observed northern high-latitude winter enhancement is broadly consistent with model predictions However, some of the latitudinal and seasonal details of observed temperature changes are contrary to equilibrium model predictions This result has little bearing on the detection issue for two reasons First, the variability of temperatures in high latitudes is greater than elsewhere and published calculations have shown that this is not an optimum region for signal detection based on signal-to-noise ratio considerations (Wigley and Jones, 1981) Second, there are still considerable doubts about the regional and seasonal details of the evolving greenhouse signal Failure to identify a particular spatial pattern of change could be because the signal has not yet been correctly specified, although it is equally likely to be because the noise still dominates

82 3 3 Tiopospheiic win mini’ and stiatospheiic coolini> All equilibrium model simulations show a wanning to near the top of the troposphere (Section 5) Trends near the tropopause and for the lowei stiatosphere, at least up to 50mb, differ in sign between models Above 50mb, all models show a cooling It has been suggested that this contrast in trends between the troposphere and stratospheie might provide a useful detection fingerprint (Epstein, 1982, Parker, 1985, Karoly 1987, 1989), but this is not necessarily the case lor a number of reasons First, identification of such a signal is hampered because observations above 50mb are of limited duration and generally of poorer quality than those in the troposphere Second, there arc reasons to expect natural variability to show a similar contrast between stratospheric and tropospheric trends (Liu and Schuurmans 1990)

Stratospheric cooling alone has been suggested as an important detection vanable, but its interpretation is difficult because it may be caused by a number ol other factors, including volcanic eiuptions and ozone depletion Furthermore, the physics of gieenhouse gas induced stratospheric cooling is much simplei than that of tropospheric wanning It is quite possible for models to behave correctly in then stiatospheric simulations yet be seriously in error in the lower atmospheie Validation of the stratospheric component of a model while of scientific importance, may be of little relevance to the detection of an enhanced greenhouse el feet in the tioposphere

Nevertheless, there is broad agieement between the observations and equilibrium model simulations While the observations (Angell 1988) show a global-mean cooling tiend from 1958 between lOOhPa and SOOhPa (Section 7, Figure 7 17), which appears to conflict with model results this cooling is apparent only between 10 and 30°N (where it is not statistically significant) and south of 60°S (wheie it is associated with the ozone hole) There are no noticeable trends in other regions Data compiled by Karoly (1987 1989) show a warming trend since 1964 up to aiound 200hPa in the Southern Hcmispheie to lOOhPa in the Northern Hemisphere to 60°N and a moie complex (but largely warming) behaviour north ol 60°N Near the tiopopause and in the lowei stiatosphere tempeiatuies have cooled since 1964 The mam difteiencc between recent observations and model simulations is in the level at which warming reverses to cooling Although the models show large model-to-modcl differences, this level is generally lower in the observations This diflcience may be associated with poor vertical resolution and the inadequate representation of the tiopopause in current climate models

8 2 I4 Global-mean pi ec ipitation me i ease

Equilibrium cxpei intents with GCMs suggest an inciease in global-mean precipitation as one might expect from the

associated increase in atmosphenc tempciature However the spatial details of the changes ate highly unceitain (Schlesinger and Mitchell 1987, and Section 5) Observations horn which the long term change in precipitation can be determined are available only ovci land aieas (see Bradley et al , 1987, Diaz ct al , 1989, and Section 7), and there are major data problems in teims of coverage and homogeneity These difficulties, coupled with the recognized model deficiencies in their simulations of precipitation and the likelihood that the precipitation signal-to-noise ratio is low (see 82 1 1), preclude any meanmglul comparison

8 2 3 5 Sea les el i i se

Increasing greenhouse gas concentrations are expected to cause (and have caused) a rise in global-mean sea level due partly to oceanic thermal expansion and paitly to melting of land-based ice masses (see Section 9) Because of the strong dependence of sea level rise on global mean temperatuie change, this element, like global mean precipitation, cannot be considered as an independent variable Observations show that global-mean sea level has risen over the past 100 years, but the magnitude of the rise is uncertain by a factor of at least two (see Section 9) As far as it can be judged, there has been a positive thermal expansion component of this sea level rise Observational evidence (e g , Meier, 1984, Wood, 1988) shows that there has been a general long term retreat of small glacicis (but with marked regional and shorter time-scale variability) and this process has no doubt contributed to sea level rise Both thermal expansion and the melting of small glaciers are consistent with global warming, but neither provides any independent information about the cause of the warming

8 2 3 6 Tiopospheiic watei \apoui me i case

Model predictions show an increase in tiopospheric water vapour content in association with mcieasing atmosphenc temperature This is of consideiablc impoitance since it is responsible for one of the mam feedback mechanisms that amplifies the enhanced greenhouse effect (Raval and Ramanathan 1989) Furthermore, a model-based signal to noise ratio analysis (see Section 8 2 11) suggests that this may be a good detection variable Howevei the brevity of available lecords and data inhomogeneities preclude any conclusive assessment of trends The available data have inhomogeneities due to major changes in radiosonde humidity instrumentation Since the mid 1970s iheie has been an apparent upward trend, largest in the tropics (Flohn and Kapala 1989 Elliott et al 1990) Howevei the magnitude of the tropical trend is much larger than any expected giecnhousc-ielated change, and it is likely that natural vailability is dominating the recoid

8.3	Multivariate or Fingerprint Methods

8.3.1	Conspectus

The hngcrpiint method, which involves the simultaneous use ol more than one time series, is the only way that the attribution problem is likely to be solved expeditiously In its most general form one might consider the time evolution ol a set of three-dimensional spatial fields, and compare model results (i e , the signal to be detected) with observations There are, however, many potential dill tculties both in applying the method and in interpreting the results, not the least of which is reliably defining the greenhouse-gas signal and showing a priori that it is unique

In studies that have been perlormed to date, predicted changes in the three-dimensional structure ol a single variable (mean values, variances and/or spatial patteins) have been compared with observed changes The com parison involves the testing ol a null hypothesis namely that the observed and modelled fields do not differ Rejection ol the null hypothesis can be interpreted in several ways It could mean that the model pattern was not present in the observations (i e in simplistic teims that there was no enhanced greenhouse effect) or that the signal was obscured by natural variability or that the picdiction was at fault in some way, due cither to model eirois oi because the chosen prediction was inappropriate We know a priori that current models have numerous deficiencies (see Sections 4 and 5), and that even on a global scale, the piedicted signal is probably obscuied by noise (Section 8 1 3) Furthermore, most studies to date have only used the results ol equilibrium simulations lather than the more appropnatc time-dependent iesults of coupled ocean-atmospheic GCM experiments 4 Because of these factors published woik in this area can onlc be considered as exploiatory, dnected largely towaids testing the methods and investigating potential statistical problems

8.3.2	Comparing Changes In Means And Variances Means, time vanances and spatial variances ol the fields of observed and predicted changes have been compared ioi a number of vaitables by Sanlet ct al (1990) Piedicted changes were estimated from the equilibrium lxCCH and 2xCC>2 simulations using the Oiegon State University (OSU) atmospheric GCM coupled to a mixed layer ocean (Schlesinger and Zhao, 1989) In all cases (different vauables, different months) the observed and modelled fields weie found to be significantly different i e , for these

4	In this iei>aid the conect e\peiintent simulation of ehans’es to date tn i espouse to abscised e>i eenliouse t>as foi c mt’s has not set been pei foi med Bee ause a leahstic model simulation would i>eneiate its own substantial natuial i ai icibilits a numbei of sue h espei intents mas be lequncd tn oidei to ensuie that i epic sentatise i esults aie obtained

tests the null hypothesis of no difference was rejected and tbe model signal could not be identified in the observations As noted above this is not an unexpected result

8.3.3	Pattern Correlation Methods

The basic approach in pattern correlation is to compare the observed and modelled time-averaged patterns of change (or changing observed and modelled patterns) using a correlation coellicient or similar statistic The word "pattern is used in a very general sense - it may refer to a two point pattern involving two time series of the same vauable or to a many-point pattern involving the full threedimensional spatial fields of more than one variable In some studies timc-standaidized variables have been used This has the advantage of giving greater emphasis to those spatial legions in which the time variance (1 e , the noise) is smallest

Four examples ol pattern correlation detection studies have appeared in the literature, all involving cornpai isons of observed and modelled temperature changes (Barnett, 1986, Bai nett and Schlesingei, 1987, Barnett, 1990, Santer et al , 1990) Barnett (1986) and Barnett and Schlesinger (1987) used the covariance between the patterns of standardized observed and modelled changes as a test statistic Equilibrium lxCCh and 2xCC>2 results from the OSU atmospheric GCM coupled to a mixed-layer ocean were employed to generate the multivariate predicted signal This pattein was then correlated with obseived changes ielative to a reference year on a year-by-year basis A significant trend in the correlation would indicate the existence of an increasing expression of the model signal in the observed data which could be interpreted as detection of an enhanced gieenhouse signal A marginally significant trend was appaient, but this was not judged to be a iobust result

Santei et al (1990) used the same model data and the spatial coirelation coefficient between the time-averaged patterns ol obseived and piedicted change as a detection parameter The observed changes used were the differences between two decades 1947 56 and 1977-86 Statistically significant diflciences between observed and model patterns of temperature change were found in all months but Febiuary (foi which the amount of common vanance was very small, less than 4%)

Barnett (1990) compared observed data with the timeevolving spatial fields from the GISS transient GCM run (Hansen et al , 1988) The model run uses realistic timedependent forcing beginning in the year 1958, and accounts for the lag effect of oceanic thermal inertia by using a diffusion parameterization of heat transport below the mixed layer Comparisons were made using spatial correlation coefficients between decadal means ol the evolving signal and the equivalent pattern in the

observations Thcie was virtually no similarity between modelled and obsei ved temperatuic patterns

The largely negative results obtained in these studies can be interpreted in a variety of ways as noted in Section 8 3 1 Because of this, failure to detect the model signal in the data cannot be taken as evidence that there is no greenhouse-gas signal in the real world Future multivariate detection studies should employ coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs forced with obsei ved greenhouse-gas concentration changes over more than just the past few decades

8.4	When Will The Greenhouse Effect be Detected ?

The fact that we have not yet detected the enhanced greenhouse eflect leads to the question when is this likely to occur9 As noted earlier, detection is not a simple yes/no issue Rather it involves the gradual accumulation of evidence in suppoit of model predictions, which in parallel with improvements in the models themselves, will increase our confidence in them and progressively narrow the uncertainties regarding such key parameters as the climate sensitivity Unceitainties will always remain Predicting when a certain confidence level might be reached is as difficult as predicting future climate change - moie so, in fact, since it requnes at least estimates of both the future signal and the futuie noise level

Nevertheless, we can provide some information on the time-scale for detection by using the unprecedented change concept mentioned bnefly in Section 8 1 4 This should provide an upper bound to the time for detection since more sophisticated methods should pioduce earlier results We take a conservative view as a starting point namely that the magnitude of natuial variability is such that all of the warming of the past centuiy could be attiibuted to this cause (Note that this is not the same as denying the existence of an enhanced greenhouse eflect With such a noise level the past warming could be explained as a 1°C greenhouse effect offset by 0 5°C natuial variability ) We then assume, again somewhat arbitrarily that a fuithei 0 5°C warming (1 e a total wanning of 1°C since the late nineteenth century) is icquned befoic we could say with high confidence, that the only possible explanation would be that the enhanced gieenhousc effect was as strong as predicted by climate models Given the lange of uncertainty in futuie forcing predictions and future model-predicted warming when would this elevated temperatuie level be reached9

The answer is given in Figuie 8 5 The upper curve shows the global mean wanning ioi the Business-as Usual Scenario (see Appendix 1) assuming a set of upwelling diffusion climate model parametcis that maximizes the warming late (viz , AT2X = 4 5 C K = 0 63 cm- sec 1 and 7t = 0) Under these cncumstanccs detection (as defined above) would occui in 12 yeais 7he lower cuive shows

Figure 8.5: Observed global-mean temperature changes (as in Figure 8 1) and extreme predictions of future change If a further 0 5°C warming were chosen as the threshold for detection of the enhanced greenhouse effect then this would be reached sometime between 2002 and 2047 In practice, detection should be based on more sophisticated methods which would bung these dates closei to the present

the global-mean warming for the lowest foicing Scenano ( D in the Annex) with model parametcis chosen to minimize the warming rate (viz AT2x = 1 ^°C K = 1 27 cm2 sec-l dncj K = 1) Detection does not occui until 2047

On the basis of this simple analysis alone we might conclude that detection with high confidence is unlikely to occui before the year 2000 If stnngent contiols aic intioduced to ieduce future greenhouse gas emissions and if the climate sensitivity is at the low end of the lange ol model predictions then it may be well into the twents first centuiy before we can say with high confidence that we have detected the enhanced greenhouse effect

The time limits inferred from Figure 8 5 aie of couise only a rough guide to the future and they aie almost certainly upper bound values Nevertheless the time fiame lor detection is likely to be of ordei a decade or moie In older to detect the enhanced greenhouse effect within this time frame it is essential to continue the development of models and to ensure that existing obsciving systems Ioi both climate vanables and potential climate foicing lactois be maintained oi improved

8.5	CONCLUSIONS

Because of the strong theoretical basis for enhanced greenhouse warming, there is considerable concern about the potential climatic effects that may result from increasing greenhouse-gas concentrations However, because of the many significant uncertainties and made quacies in the observational climate tecord in our knowledge of the causes of natural climatic variability and in current computer models, scientists working in this field cannot at this point in time make the definitive statement

Yes wc have now seen an enhanced greenhouse effect

It is accepted that global-mean tempeiatuies have increased over the past 100 yeais and aie now warmer than at any time in the period of instrumental 1 ecord This global warming is consistent with the results ol simple model predictions of greenhouse gas induced climate change However, a number of other factors could have contributed to this warming and it is impossible to prove a cause and effect relationship Furthermore when other details of the instrumental climate record are compaied with model predictions, while there are some areas of agreement theie are many areas of disagreement

The main reasons for this are

1)	The inherent variability of the climate system appears to be sufficient to obscuie any enhanced gieenhouse signal to date Poor quantitative understanding of low frequency climate vai lability (pai ticulai ly on the 10-100 year time scale) leaves open the possibility that the observed warming is largely unrelated to the enhanced greenhouse effect

2)	The lack of reliability of models at the regional spatial scale means that the expected signal is not yet well defined This precludes any turn conclusions being drawn from multivariate detection studies

3)	The ideal model expei intents lequired to define the signal have not yet been perfoimed What is lequired are time-dependent simulations using realistic timedependent forcing earned out with fully coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs

4)	Uncertainties in, and the shoitncss ol available instrumental data records mean that the low frequency characteristics of natuial variability are virtually unknown for many climate elements

Thus it is not possible at this time to attribute all or even a large part of the observed global mean warming to the enhanced greenhouse effect on the basis of the obseivational data currently available Equally however we have no observational evidence that conflicts with the model based estimates of climate sensitivity Thus because ol model and other uncertainties we cannot piecludc the possibility that the enhanced gieenhouse effect has conti ibuted substantially to past wanning noi even that the meenhouse gas induced waiming has been grcatei than

that observed, but is partly offset by natural variability and/or other anthropogenic effects

References

Angell J K 1988 Variations and trends in tropospheric and stratospheric global temperatures, 1958 87 J Chm 1 1296 1313

Baker DJ and Barnett TP 1982 Possibilities of detecting CC>2 induced effects In Pi oceedim;s of the Woikshop on lust Detection oj Cai bon Dioxide Effects DOE/CONF 8106214 (H Moses and MC MacCracken, Coordinators) Ofl ice of Energy Research US Dept of Energy Washington DC 301 342

Barnett TP 1986 Detection of changes in global tropospheric tempeiature field induced by greenhouse gases / Gcophss Res 91 6659 6667

Barnett TP 1990 An attempt to detect the greenhouse gas signal in a transient GCM simulation In Gieenhouse Geis Induced Climatic Change A Ci itual Appiaisal of Simulations and Obscisations (ME Schlesinger Ed) Elsevier Science Publishers Amsterdam (in press)

Barnett TP and Schlesinger ME 1987 Detecting changes in global climate induced by gieenhouse gases J Gcophss Res 92 14 772 14 780

Bell T L 1982 Optimal weighting of data to detect climatic change An application to the caibon dioxide problem J Gcophss Res SI 11161 11 170

Bell T L 1986 Theoiy ol optimal weighting ot data to detect climatic change / Atmos S< i 43 1694 1710

Bohn B Doos BR Jager J and Warrick RA (Eds) 1986 Tlu Gieenhouse Effect Climatic Change and Ecoss stems SCOPE Vol 29 John Wiley and Sons Ltd Chichester 539pp

Bradlev R S Diaz H F Eischeid J K Jones P D Kelly P M and Goodess C M 1987 Precipitation fluctuations over Noithern Hemisphere land areas since the mid 19th century Science 237 171 175

Bryan K Man ibe S and Spelnran MJ 1988 Intel hemispheric asymmctiy in the transient response of a coupled ocean atmosphere model to a CO2 forcing / Phss Oc canoe, 18 851 867

Dia/ HF Bradley RS and Eischeid JK 1989 Precipitation fluctuations over global land areas since the late 1800s	/

Gcophss Res 94 1195 1210

Elliott WP Smith ME and Angell JK 1990 On monitoring tiopospheric water vapour changes using radiosonde data In Gieenhouse Gas Induced Climatic Change A Critical Appiaisal oj Simulations and Obsei sations (M E Schlesinger Ed ) Elsevier Science Publishers Amsterdam (in press)

Epstein ES 1982 Detecting climate change J App Met 21 1172 1182

Flohn H and Kapala A 1989 Changes ot tropical sea air interaction processes ovei a 30 year period Native 338 244 246

Gilliland RL 1982 Solai volcanic and CO2 forcing of lccent climatic change Chin Change 4 111 131

Gilliland, R L and Schneider S H 1984 Volcanic CO? and solar forcing of Northein and Southern Hemisphere surface air temperatures Natme, 310, 38 41

Hansen, J , Fung, 1 , Lacis, A , Rind, D , Lebedeff, S , Ruedy, R , Russell, G and Stone, P , 1988 Global climate changes as forecast by the Goddard Institute for Space Studies threedimensional model J Geophys Res, 93, 9341-9364

Hansen, J , Johnson, D , Lacis, A , Lebedeff, S Lee, P Rind, D and Russell, G, 1981 Climate impact of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide $< icnce, 213, 957 966

Hasselmann, K , 1976 Stochastic climate models, 1, Theory Tellus, 28, 473-485

Ingram, W J , Wilson, C A and Mitchell J F B , 1989 Modeling climate change an assessment of sea ice and surface albedo feedbacks / Geophys Res , 94, 8609 8622

Karoly, D J , 1987 Southern Hemisphere temperature trends A possible greenhouse gas effect7 Geophys Res Lett ,14, 11391141

Karoly, D J , 1989 Northern Hemisphere temperature trends A possible greenhouse gas effect7 Geophys Res Lett, 16, 465468

Liu, Q and Schuurmanns, C J E , 1990 The correlation of tropospheric and stratospheric temperatures and its effect on the detection of climate changes Geophss Res Lew (tn press)

MacCracken, M C and Luther, F M (Eds ), 1985 Detecting the Climatic Effects of Increasing Caihon Dioxide U S Department of Energy, Carbon Dioxide Research Division, Washington, DC, 198 pp

MacCracken, M C and Moses, H 1982 The first detection of carbon dioxide effects Woikshop Summary, 8-10 June 1981, Harpers Ferry, West Virginia Bull Am Met Soc , 63, 11641178

Madden, RA and Ramanathan, V, 1980 Detecting climate change due to increasing carbon dioxide Science, 209, 763768

Manabe, S and Stouffer, RJ, 1980 Sensitivity of a global climate model to an increase of CO? concentration in the atmosphere J Geophys Res , 85, 5529 5554

Meier, M F , 1984 Contribution of small glaciers to global sea level Science, 226, 1418 1421

Mitchell, J F B , Wilson, C A and Cunnington, W M , 1987 On CO2 climate sensitivity and model dependence of the results QJ R Met Soc , 113,293-322

National Research Council, 1983 Changing Climate Repo/tof the Caihon Dioxide Assessment Committee (W A Nierenberg, Committee Chairman) Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate, National Academy Press, Washington, D C , 496

Parker, DE, 1985 On the detection of temperature changes induced by increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide Q J R Met Soc , 111,587-601

Ramanathan, V , Callis, L , Cess, R , Hansen, J , Isaksen, I, Kuhn, W , Lacis, A , Luther, F , Mahlman, J , Reck R and Schlesinger, M , 1987 Climate-chemical interactions and effects of changing atmospheric trace gases Res Geoplixs 25, 1441 1482

Raval, A and Ramanathan V, 1989 Observational determination of the greenhouse effect Natme 342 758 761

Robock, A , 1978 Internally and externally caused climate change J Atmos Sc 1 , 35, 1111 1122

Robock A 1983 Ice and snow feedbacks and the latitudinal and seasonal distribution of climate sensitivity / Atmos Si 1	40

986 997

Santer B D , Wigley, T M L , Schlesinger M E and Jones P D 1990 Multivariate methods for the detection of greenhousegas-induced climate change In. Gi eenhousc Gas Induced Climatic Change A Critical Appiaisal of Simulations and Ohsei cations (ME Schlesinger Ed) Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam (in press)

Schlesinger, ME, Barnett, TP and Jiang, X J 1990 On greenhouse gas signal detection strategies In Gieenhouse Gas-Induc ed Climatic Change A Ciitical Appiaisal of Simulations and Ohsei sations (M E Schlesinger Ed) Elsexiei Science Publishers, Amsterdam (m press)

Schlesinger, M E and Mitchell, J F B 1987 Climate model simulations of the equilibrium climatic response to increased carbon dioxide Res Geopliy s 25, 760 798

Schlesinger, ME and Zhao, Z-C , 1989 Seasonal climate changes induced by doubled CO2 as simulated by the OSU atmospheric GCM mixed layer ocean model I Cltm 2, 459 495

Schonwiese, C -D , 1990 Multivariate statistical assessments of greenhouse-induced climatic change and comparison with the results from general circulation models In, Gieenhouse Gas Induced Climatic Change A Ciitical Appiaisal of Simulations and Ohsei sations (M E Schlesinger, Ed ), Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam (in press)

Stouffer, R J , Manabe, S and Bryan, K , 1989 Interhemispheric asymmetry in climate response to a gradual increase of atmospheric CO2 Natme 342,660 662

Thiebaux, H J and Zwiers, F W , 1984 The interpretation and estimation of effective sample size J Cltm & App Met, 23, 800-811

Tsionis, AA and and Elsner, J B . 1989 Testing the global warming hypothesis Geophys Res Lett 16, 795 797

Vinnikov, K Ya and Groisman, P Ya, 1982 Empirical study of climate sensitivity lssestiya AS USSR Atmosphei ic and Oceanic Physics ,18(11), 1159 1169

Washington, W M and Meehl, G A , 1989 Climate sensitivity due to increased COj experiments with a coupled atmosphere and ocean general circulation model Cltm Dsnam , 4, 1 38

Wigley, T M L and Jones, P D , 1981 Detecting CO2 induced climatic change Natuie, 292, 205-208

Wigley, T M L and Raper, S C B , 1987 Thermal expansion of seawater associated with global wanning Natme 330 127 131

Wigley, T M L and Raper, S C B , 1990 Natural variability of the climate system and detection of the greenhouse effect Natme, 344, 324-327

Wigley, T M L , Angell, J K and Jones, P D , 1985 Analysis of the temperature record In, Detecting the Climatic Effects of Inc 1 easing Caihon Dioxide, DOE/ER 0235 (M C MacCracken and F M Luther, Eds ), U S Dept of Energy, Carbon Dioxide Research Division, Washington, D C , 55 90

9

Sea Level Rise

R. WARRICK, J. OERLEMANS

Contributors:

P. Beaumont; R.J. Braithwaite; DJ. Drewery; V. Gornitz; J.M. Grove; W. Haeberli;

A. Higashi; J.C. Leiva; C.S. Lingle; C. Lorius; S.C.B. Raper; B. Wold;

P.L. Woodworth.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary

9.1	Sea Level Rise: Introduction

9.2	Factors Affecting Sea Level

9.3	Has Sea Level Been Rising Over the Last 100 Years ?

9.3.1	Comparison of Recent Estimates

9.3.2	Possible Sources of Error

9.3.3	Accelerations in Sea Level Rise

9.4	Possible Contributing Factors to Past and Future Sea Level Rise

9.4.1	Thermal Expansion of the Oceans.

9.4.2	Land Ice

261

263

263

263

264

265

266

266

266

268

9.4.3	Glaciers and Small Ice Caps	268

9.4.4	The Greenland Ice Sheet.	269

9.4.5	The Antarctic Ice Sheet.	271

9.4.6	Possible Instability of the West Antarctic

Ice Sheet.	273

9.4.7	Other Possible	Contributions	274

9.4.8	Synthesis	274

9.5	How Might Sea Level Change in the Future ?	275

9.5.1	Methods and	Assumptions	276

9.5.2	Discussion	276

9.6	Summary and Conclusions	278

References	279

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Section addresses three questions

Has global-mean sea level been rising during the last 100 years9

What are the causal factors that could explain a past rise in sea level9

And what increases in sea level can be expected in the future9

Despite numerous problems associated with estimates of globally coherent, secular changes in sea level based on tide gauge records, we conclude that it is highly likely that sea level has been rising over the last 100 years There is no new evidence that would alter substantially the conclusions of earlier assessments regarding the rate of change Our judgement is that

The average rate of rise over the last 100 years has been 1 0

2 0 mm yr 1

There is no firm evidence ot accelerations in sea level rise during this centuiy (although there is some evidence that sea level rose faster in this century compared to the previous two centuries)

As to the possible causes and their specilic contributions to past sea level rise, the uncertainties are very large, particularly for Antarctica However in general it appears that the observed rise can be explained by thermal expansion of the oceans and by the increased melting ot mountain glaciers and the margin of the Greenland ice sheet From present data it is impossible to judge whether the Antarctic ice sheet as a whole is currently out of balance and is contributing, either positively or negatively, to changes in sea level

Future changes in sea level were estimated for each of the IPCC forcing scenarios (using the same simple box model as in Section 6) For each scenario, three projections - best estimate, high and low - were made corresponding to the estimated range of

uncertainty in each of the potential contributing factors It is found that

For the IPCC Business-as Usual Scenano at yeai 2030 global-mean sea level is 8 29 cm higher than today, with a best-estimate of 18 cm At the year 2070, the rise is 21 -71 cm, with a best-estimate of 44 cm

Most of the contribution is estimated to derive from thermal expansion of the oceans and the increased melting of mountain glaciers and small ice caps

On the decadal time scale, the role of the polar ice sheets is expected to be minor, but they contribute substantially to the total uncertainty Antarctica is expected to conti ibutc negatively to sea level due to increased snow accumulation associated with warming A rapid disintegration of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet due to global warming is unlikely within the next century

For the lower forcing scenarios (B,C and D) the sets of sea level rise projections are similar, at least until the mid 21st century On average these projections are approximately one third lower than those of the Business as Usual Scenano

Even with substantial decreases in the emissions of the majoi greenhouse gases, future increases in temperature and con sequently, sea level are unavoidable - a sea level rise commitment - due to lags m the climate system

This present assessment does not foresee a sea level rise of >1 metre during the next century Nonetheless, the implied rate of rise for the best-estimate projection corresponding to the IPCC Business-as-Usual Scenario is about 3-6 times faster than over the last 100 years

9.1	Sea Level Rise: Introduction

This section is primarily concerned with decade-to-century changes in global-mean sea level, particularly as related to climatic change First, the evidence for sea level rise during the last 100 years is reviewed as a basis for looking for climate-sea level connections on a decade-to-century timescale Next, the possible contributing factors - thermal expansion of the oceans and the melting of land ice - to both past and future sea level change are examined Finally, the issue of future sea level due to global warming is addressed

9.2	Factors Affecting Sea Level

Changes in sea level occur for many reasons on different time and space scales Tide gauges measure sea level variations in relation to a fixed benchmark and thus record "relative sea level" change due both to vertical land movements and to real (eustatic) changes in the ocean level Vertical land movements result from various natural isostatic movements, sedimentation, tectonic processes and even anthropogenic activities (e g , groundwater and oil extraction) In parts of Scandinavia, for instance, relative sea level is decreasing by as much as lm per century due to isostatic "rebound" following the last major glaciation In attempting to identify a globally-coherent, secular trend in

MSL, the vertical land movements contaminate tide gauge records and have to be removed

Eustatic sea level is also affected by many factors Differences in atmospheric pressure, winds, ocean cuncnts and density of seawater all cause spatial and temporal variations in sea level in relation to the geoid (the surface of constant gravitational potential corresponding to the surface which the ocean would assume if ocean temperature and salinity were everywhere 0°C and 35 o/oo, respectively, and surface air pressure was everywheie constant) Changes in the geoid itsell, due to re-distribution of mass within the Earth, are irrelevant on the decadal-century timescales under consideration Over these timescales, the most important climate-related factors are likely to be thermal expansion of the oceans and melting of land ice (but not floating ice shelves or sea ice)

9.3	Has Sea Level Been Rising Over the Last 100 Years?

It is highly likely that global-mean sea level (MSL) has been rising This is the general conclusion of no fewer than 13 studies of MSL change over various periods during the last 100 years (Table 9 1) The estimates range from about 0 5mm/yr to 3 Omm/yr, with most lying in the range 1 02 Omm/yr

Table 9.1: Estimate of Global Sea-Le\ el Change (updated fiom Barnett, 1985, Robin, 1986)

Rat	:e (mm/yr)	Comments	References
>0 5		Cryologic estimate	Thorarmsson (1940) +
1 1	±08	Many stations, 1807-1939	Gutenburg (1941)
1 2	- 1 4	Combined methods	Kuenen (1950)
1 1	± 04	Six stations, 1807 1943	Lisitzin (1958, in Lisitzin 1974)
1 2		Selected stations, 1900 1950	Fairbridge & Krebs (1962)
30		Many stations, 1935 1975	Emery et al (1980)
1 2		Many stations-> regions 1880 1980	Gornitz et al (1982)
1 5		Many stations, 1900 1975	Klige (1982)
1 5	± 0 15 f	Selected stations, 1903-1969	Barnett (1983)
1 4	± 0 14 t	Many stations -> regions, 1881-1980	Barnett (1984)
23	± 023 +	Many stations -> regions, 1930 1980	Barnett (1984)
1 2	± 03 f	130 stations, 1880-1982	Gornitz & Lebedeff (1987)
1 0	±01 +	130 stations >11 regions, 1880-1982	Gornitz & Lebedeff (1987)
1 15		155 stations, 1880-1986	Barnett (1988)
24	± 09§	40 stations, 1920-1970	Peltier & Tushingham (1989, 1990)
1 7	±0134}	84 stations 1900 1980	Trupm and Wahr (1990)

t = Value plus 95% confidence interval § = Mean and standard deviation

In addition, several assessments of the likely rate ol past sea level use have been made 12±5cm since 1900 horn the SCOPE 29 assessment (Bohn et al , 1986) 10-25cm since 1900 from the US DOE assessment (MacCtacken and Luther, 1985), and 10-20cm ovei last 100 years from the PRB assessment (Polar Research Board, 1985) These assessments also include detailed reviews of the literature (Bainett, 1985, Aubrey, 1985, Robin, 1986) Rather than repeat these, we shall focus on the most recent studies and ask whether they provide any new information that would substantially alter previous assessments

9.3.1	Comparison of Recent Estimates

The analyses by Gornitz and Lebedeff (1987, also see Gormtz, 1990) used tide-gauge data from 130 stations with

Figure 9.1: Histogram of number of tide-gauge stations vs sea level trends Triangle indicates mean rate of sea-level rise lines indicate +/- sigma (a) All tide gauge stations with lecord length > 20 years raw data (b) Subset of tide gauge stations, long range trends included (c) Same subset of stations as (a), long lange trends subtracted From Gomtiz (1990)

minimum lccord length of 20 yeais to estimate the average iate of sea level change ovei the period 1880-1982 This analysis differed from previous analyses (Goinitz et al , 1982) by including a mote caieful correction for vertical land movements using extensive data from 14C dated Holocene sea level indicators (see below) This correction sigmlicantly reduced the spread of the trend estimates from the individual stations (Figure 9 1)

Using two dillerent averaging techniques to produce composite global MSL cuives (averaging individual stations veisus tegional trends), the study obtained estimates of 1 2 ± 0 3mm/yr and 1 0 ± 0 lmm/yr respectively These results do not differ significantly from their previous findings

The study by Barnett (1988) is an update of previous work (Barnett, 1983, 1984) in which 155 stations are analysed over the period 1880-1986 A rate ol 1 15mm/yr is obtained, in close agreement with the rates noted above However, from a comparison of the composite global sea

Figure 9.2: Global mean sea level rise over the last century The baseline is obtained by setting the average for the period 1951 1970 to zero The dashed line represents the annual mean and the solid line the 5 year running mean (a) Gornitz and Lebedeif (1987) (b) Barnett (1988)

Table 9.2 Time-dependency of the Tide Gaui>e Recoi ds (Modified f om Peltiei & Tushinifiam 1990)

Window	Start	End Year No. of	LR Est. of	SD ofLR	EOF Est. of	SD of
Width (yr)	Year	Records	SL Rise	Estimate	SL Rise	EOF Est.
		Available	(mm/yr)	(mm/yr)	(mm/yr)	(mm/yr)

Fixed Window Width

51	1890	1940	11	1 6	1 5	07	07
51	1900	1950	20	1 6	09	1 2	06
51	1910	1960	27	1 8	08	1 4	06
51	1920	1970	40	23	08	24	09
51	1930	1980	33	20	1 1	1 5	06

Variable Window Width

71	1900	1970	13	1 9	08	1 2	05
66	1905	1970	17	1 9	08	1 2	05
61	1910	1970	24	1 9	08	1 5	06
56	1915	1970	29	2 1	08	1 7	07
51	1920	1970	40	23	08	24	09
46	1925	1970	52	22	1 0	23	1 1
41	1930	1970	66	1 9	1 1	1 9	1 1
36	1935	1970	82	1 6	1 5	1 4	1 0

All tide gauge records have been reduced using the standard model

level curves (Figure 9 2), it is apparent that while Gomitz and Lebedeffs curve appears linear over the entire time period, Barnett's curve suggests a steeper rate of rise over about 1910-1980 - approximately 1 7mm/yr This is more nearly in line with estimates of Peltier and Tushingham (1990) for the same time period (see Table 9 2)

Peltier and Tushingham (1989 1990) select a minimum record length of 51 years correct the data for ongoing glacial isostatic adjustments using a geophysical model and analyse the corrected data using both lineai regression (LR) techniques and empirical orthogonal function (EOF) analyses From a final total of 40 stations ovei the time period 1920-1970, they conclude that the global rate ol sea level rise is 2 4 ± 0 9mm/yr This rate is considerably higher than most other estimates noted in Table 9 1 However, the authors caution that the results are sensitive to variations in the analysis procedure As shown in Table 9 2, variations in either the record length or period of record have large eflects on the estimated rate of rise In fact, for all combinations other than then preferred period 1920-1970 (chosen to maximize the number of stations with a minimum 50-year record length) the estimated rates are lower and in a numbei of cases compare favourably with those of Gormtz and Lcbedetf (1987) Barnett (1988) and Trupin and Wahr (1990)

Why the differences9 Possible reasons have to do with choice of minimum record length, period of record, number of stations, geographical representation correction procedures for vertical land movements, and methods of data aggregation and analysis Unfortunately these factors are interrelated and not easily isolated from published studies Nevertheless, it is significant that, despite the differences both the recent and earlier studies all find a positive trend in global MSL This seems to be a rather robust finding There is however the possibility that all the studies could be systematically biased

9	3 2 Possible Sources of Error

There are several potential sources of systematic bias common to all such studies Firstly, they make use of the same global MSL dataset that of the Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level (PSMSL) an International Council of Scientific Unions databank located at the Bidston Observatory UK (Pugh et al 1987) The PSMSL collects data from approximately 1300 stations worldwide However only 850 of these are suitable for time senes work (the PSMSL Revised Local Reference (RLR) dataset) and 420 of these are 20 years oi more in lensth Tide gauge records contain many signals other than a secular trend These stem primarily from large interannual

meteoiological and oceanographic forcings on sea level and, in principle, can be modelled and thereby removed from the record In practice, the variability is such that accurate trends can be computed only given 15 20 years of data, which significantly reduces the size of the dataset available for analysis

Secondly, there is an historical geographical bias in the dataset in favour of Northern Europe, North America and Japan Areas of Africa, Asia, ocean islands and polar regions are sparsely represented The geogiaphical bias inherent in any global dataset will propagate into all studies This bias can be ieduced (but not eliminated) by treating regional subsets of the dataset as independent information, as has been done in the recent studies described above

The problem of geographical bias is now being addressed with the establishment ol the Global Level of the Sea Surface (GLOSS) global tide gauge network cooidinated by the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) (Pugh, 1990) Most islands involved now have tide gauges and most continental GLOSS stations (other than polar sites) are now operational, but much work remains to improve standards and the reliability of observations

Finally, perhaps the most important source of eiror stems from the difficulties involved in removing vertical land movements from the dataset In addition to the effects noted above, most mid-latitude stations located on continental margins are especially susceptible to effects from sedimentation, groundwater and oil extraction, and tectonic influences and could be undergoing general submergence, which, unless accounted foi, could introduce a positive bias into any global MSL secular trend (Pirazzoli et al , 1987) In order to identify a globally-coherent trend that can be linked to changes in global climate, such effects have to be removed The issue is how to do so

In the future, the inherent ambiguity between land and ocean level changes in a tide gauge record will be solved by the use ol advanced geodetic methods, but such data arc not available for present analysis (Carter et al , 1989) In lieu of new geodetic data, one approach adopted by recent analyses has been to model explicitly the expected geology-induced MSL changes at each tide gauge site by the use of ancillary Holocene data (e g , molluscs, corals, peats Gormtz et al , 1982, Gormtz and Lcbedcff, 1987) or by the use ol geodynamic models of the Earth (Peltier and Tushingham, 1989, 1990) The other approach is simply to assemble a sufficiently broad geographical spread of records such that (it is hoped) the net contribution of land movements reduces to zero (Barnett 1983 1984 1988)

These dillerences in approach probably account substantially for the different results noted in Table 9 1 But it cannot be said with confidence that vertical land movements (or, that is the failure to account adequately for

them), along with reliance on a single dataset and problems ol geographical bias, have not systematically biased all studies in the same direction

9.3.3	Accelerations in Sea Level Rise

Is there evidence of any "accelerations" (or departures from long-term linear trends) in the rate of sea level rise7 From examinations of both composite regional and global curves and individual tide gauge records, there is no convincing evidence of an acceleration in global sea level rise during the twentieth century For longer periods, however, there is weak evidence for an acceleration over the last 2-3 centuries

Long-term analyses are hindered by the scarcity of tidegauge lccords longer than 100-120 years Data are limited to a few stations in Europe and North Amenca Woodwoith (1990) inspected individual tide gauge records in Europe and lound that although there is no general evidence for an increasing (or decreasing) rate of MSL change during the past century, a regionally-coherent acceleration ol the older of 0 4mm/year per century is apparent over the last 2-3 centuries This finding is supported by Gormtz and Solow (1989) who find weak evidence lor an increase in the trend around 1895 Similar conclusions were reached by Ekman (1988) from an examination of one of the longest tide-gauge records, at Stockholm Extension of such findings to the global scale, howevei should be carried out with caution

We now turn to the possible contributing factors to see if we can explain the past use

9.4	Possible Contributing Factors To Past and Future Sea Level Rise

There are four major climate-related factors that could possibly explain a rise in global MSL on the 100-year time scale These are

1)	thermal expansion of the oceans,

2)	glaciers and small ice caps,

3)	the Greenland ice sheet, and

4)	the Antarctic ice sheet (including the special case of the West Antarctic ice sheet)

In this section, we examine the sensitivity of each factor to changes in climate (particularly temperature), and estimate its possible contribution to past sea level change In the subsequent section, attention is then turned to future sea level change

9.4.1	Thermal Expansion of The Oceans

At constant mass, the volume of the oceans, and thus sea level, will vary with changes in the density of sea-water Density is inversely related to temperature Thus as the oceans warm, density decreases and the oceans expand - a

steric rise in sea level Marked regional variations in sea water density and volume can also result from changes in salinity, but this effect is ielatively minor at the global scale

In order to estimate oceanic expansion (past or future) changes in the interior temperature, salinity and density ol the oceans have to be considered, either empirically or by models Unfortunately, observational data are scant, both in time and space (Barnett, 1985) A few recent analyses have been carried out on the limited time-series data For instance, Roemmich (1985) examined the 1955 1981 Panuhris series of deep hydrographic stations off Bermuda and Thomson and Tabata (1987) examined the Station PAPA (northeast Pacific Ocean) steric height anomalies for a similar 27-year lccord The latter study found that open ocean steric heights arc incieasmg linearly at 0 93mm/yeai However, in this and other studies the large mterannual variability creates too much noise to be confident of the estimate derived fiom such a short time-sei les Moreover the limited geographical coverage makes inference to the global scale problematic In a few decades current cffoits such as the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) will be begin to fill the data gaps and overcome these problems

An alternative approach could be based on numerical models of the oceans circulation (Barnett, 1985) Ideally, detailed three-dimensional models could describe the various oceanic mixing processes and could simulate heat transfer and expansion effects throughout the oceans However, such models are in the early stages of development and applications to problems of global

wanning and theimal expansion aic lew in numbei A drawback of this soit of model is that the computing time lequired precludes numerous runs for sensitivity analyses

Instead for the present assessment a simple upwellingdiffusion energy-balance climate model is used Typically this type of model repiesents the woilds land and oceans by a lew boxes and complicated piocesses of oceanic mixing are simplified in one or more paiameteis (ioi review see Hoffert and Flannery 1985) Such a model was used to estimate the transient global warming (see Sections 6 and 8 for other results and Section 8 for the justiiication foi using this type of model) The inclusion of expansion coefficients in the model (varying with depth and possibly latitude) allows the sea level changes to be estimated as well In order to maintain consistency thioughout this assessment both past and future (see below) theimal expansion effects are also estimated with tins modelling technique beanng in nnnd that full undeistanding oi the dynamic processes and their eflects on the depths and timing ol ocean warming will eventually require moie physically realistic models

The model ol Wigley and Raper (1989) was loiced by past changes in radiative lorcing due to increasing atmospheric concentiations ol greenhouse gases (see Section 2) The internal model parameters that most allect the output are the diffusivity (K), the sinking water to global mean temperature change ratio (7C) and the climate sensitivity (AT2x, the global-mean equilibrium temperature change for a CCb doubling) (see Section 6) In order to estimate past thermal expansion effects, the parametei values were constrained to maintain consistency with

Table 9.3 Some physical chaiacteiistics of qlaciei iceonEaith Somces Flint (1971), Radok et al (1982) Diewix (1983), Haebei li et al (1988), Ohmuia and Reeh (1990) Estimated accmacy t =15%, tt = 30c/c otheiwise hettei than 10%

	Antarctica (grounded ice)	Greenland	Glaciers & small ice caps
Area (10^ km^)	11 97	1 68	0 55
Volume (1C)6 km^ ice)	29 33	2 95	Oil tt
Mean thickness (m)	2,488	1,575	200 tt
Mean elevation (m)	2,000	2,080	-
Equivalent sea level (m)	65	7	0 35 tt
Accumulation (10^ kg/yr)	2200 ft	535 t	-
Ablation (10'^ kg/yr)	< 10 ft	280 tt	-
Calving (10*2 kg/yr)	2200 ft	255 tt	-
Mean equilibrium line altitude (m)		950 t	0 - 6,300
Mass turnover time (yr)	-15,000	-5,000	50- 1,000

observed global warming over the same time period (i.e , 0.3 - 0.6"C; see Section 7). For the period 1880-1985, the resultant range of sea level rise due to thermal expansion is about 2-6cm (also see Wigley and Raper, 1987; 1990).

9.4.2	Land Ice

A distinction is made between glaciers and small ice caps, the Greenland ice sheet and the Antarctic ice sheet, since different climatic characteristics and different response times are involved. Table 9.3 lists some of their physical properties.

A large uncertainty exists regarding the volume of glaciers and small ice caps. Although the total area is relatively well-known (Haeberli et al., 1988), the mean thickness is not. Here a value of 200m is adopted, which really is a first-order estimate. Fortunately, on small time scales, (up to several decades), it is the surface area that largely determines the changes in runoff.

Although the positive and negative contributions to the mass budget of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets noted in Table 9.3 sum up to zero, it is actually unknown how close the ice sheets are to equilibrium (a more detailed discussion is given below). This introduces the problem of choosing an initial state for model integrations to estimate future sea level. In a previous assessment (Ocrlemans, 1989), the year AD 1850 was taken as a starting point, and it was suggested to simply add the "unexplained part" of past sea level rise to the calculated future contributions from thermal expansion and land ice. The unexplained trend can also be associated with long-term changes of the ice sheets, but also to unknown tectonic effects. We return to this particular problem later.

From Table 9.3 a notable difference between the Greenland and Antarctic ice is evident. On Greenland there is significant ablation (melting and runoff, evaporation); on Antarctica ablation is a negligible component in the total mass budget. This is also 'reflected in the altitude of the equilibrium line (= zero annual mass gain). It is instructive to consider this in the light of a generalised mass-balance curve, where mass gain and loss are plotted as a function of annual surface air temperature (Figure 9.3). The resulting mass balance is in metres of water equivalent per year. Depending on the annual temperature range, ablation occurs for annual temperatures higher than -15 to -10°C. At the lower reaches, accumulation increases with temperature, reaches a maximum in the vicinity of the freezing point and then decreases.

The net specific balance thus shows two ranges with different behaviour. In range (a) mass balance increases with temperature, in range (b) it decreases with temperature. This makes the response of ice masses to climatic change complicated. Most glaciers and the Greenland ice sheet are mainly, but not entirely, in region (b). The Antarctic ice sheet with its much colder climate is

Figure 9.3: Dependence of ablation (evaporation and runoff) and accumulation on annual surface temperature (upper panel). The dependence of net annual balance (lower panel) on temperature changes sign, which complicates the response of glaciers to climate change. The picture is schematic and will change from place to place. In regions with excessive precipitation, the mean temperature at equilibrium is higher.

situated in region (a). In case of a climatic warming, one expects an increasing surface mass balance for the Antarctic ice sheet (contributing to a sea level lowering) and a decreasing mass balance for the other ice bodies (contributing to sea level rise).

9.4.3	Glaciers and Small Ice Caps

The majority of valley glaciers has been retreating over the last hundred years. Although long records of glacier length are only available for some glaciers in the European-North Atlantic region (Figure 9.4), geomorphological investigations have made it clear that the trend of glacier retreat has generally been world-wide since the Little Ice Age (Grove, 1988). Wastage was most pronounced in the middle of the 20th century. Around 1960, many glaciers started to advance. In the 1980s this advance slowed down

Figure 9.4: Variations of some selected glaciers as measured by their length. Data from Bjomsson (1979); Ostrem et al. (1977);

Kasser (1967, 1973); Kasscr and Haeberli (1979); Muller (1977); Vivian (1975); Haeberli (1985).

or stopped in several glacier basins (e.g., Haeberli et al., 1989a), but not everywhere. In Scandinavia, for instance, mass balance remained positive on the maritime glaciers and close to zero on the others.

The main published estimate of the contribution of retreating glaciers to past sea level rise is that of Meier (1984). In his analysis, Meier assumed that the magnitude of the long-term changes, for which data are sparse, are proportional to the difference between summer and winter balance, for which data are more abundant. This allowed extrapolation of measurements on a few glaciers to a world-wide scale. Meier estimated that during the period 1900-1961, glacier retreat contributed 2.8 cm, or 0.46 ± 0.26 mm yr"1, to global sea level rise. By using data from three well-documented glaciers in temperate climate regions, Meier also extrapolated the record to encompass 1885-1974. This gives an average rate of sea level rise which is somewhat less than 0.46 mm yr-1.

During the period 1900-1961, global mean temperature rose by approximately 0.35°C (see Section 7). This yields a sensitivity in terms of sea level rise of 1.3 mm yr'1 per degree (with the ocean area equal to 361 million km2).

This sensitivity value is broadly supported by mass balance studies. In the study noted above Meier found a net glacier mass balance of -0.38 ± 0,2m/yr for 25 well studied glaciers, converting to a sensitivity of -1 m yr'* per degree temperature rise. This can be compared to other, more direct estimates. For example, based on an analysis of 29 years of climatological and mass balance data from the Hintereisferner (a well-studied glacier in the Austrian Alps), Greuell (1989) finds a sensitivity of -0.41 m yr"1 per degree warming. Kuhn (1990) suggest a global value of the order of -0.5 m yr'1 per degree. Sensitivity tests with an energy balance model for a glacier surface, including albedo feedback, yields values ranging from -0.45 m yr-1 per degree warming for drier climates to -0.7 m yr"1 per degree warming for moist climates (Oerlcmans, 1990). Altogether, these studies come up with smaller values than the -1 m yr-1 per degree derived from Meier's estimate of change in glacier mass balance combined with a figure for the global temperature change. It is probably the use of this global temperature change from which the discrepancy arises. It is known that summer temperature is the important parameter, and it also seems unlikely that the mean change over the glacierized regions can be represented by the global mean temperature. The global sensitivity value inferred by these studies is 1.2+ 0.6 mm yr"1 per degree warming.

In our judgement glacier shrinkage will continue and accelerate in a warming climate.

9.4.4	The Greenland Ice Sheet.

Estimates of the mass budget of the Greenland ice sheet have been hampered by a pronounced lack of data. Accumulation measurements have been done on a few traverses only (see Radok et al., 1982). Systematic ablation measurements in the marginal zone have been carried out in several places, but all located in the southwestern part of Greenland (Braithwaite and Oleson, 1989). The only profile from the ice margins to the region well above equilibrium line is the EGIG profile (Expedition Glaciologique Internationale au Groenland, West Greenland, at about 70°N latitude). Here mass balance and meteorological measurements have been earned out in the summer seasons of 1959 and 1967 (Ambach, 1963, 1979).

Table 9.4 lists estimates of the total mass budget of the Greenland ice sheet as compiled by Robin (1986). The differences appear quite large. The zeros in the column "balance" should not be interpreted as an indication for a balanced state - equilibrium has only been assumed. When going through the original papers it becomes clear that, on the basis of currently available data, there is considerable

Table 9.4 Estimates of the mass budget of the Gieenland ice sheet in 10H ky/yi (updated fiom Robin, 1986)

Source	Accumulation	Ablation	Calving	Balance
Bader (1961)	+630	-120 to -270	-240	+270 to +120
Benson(1962)	+500	272	-215	+ 13
Bauer (1968)	+500	-330	-280	-110
Weidick (1984)	+500	295	-205	0
Reeh(1985)	+487	-169	-318	0
Ohmura & Reeh (1990)	+535			

Table 9.5 Estimates of the sensitivity of the Gieenland mass balance to climatic change T = tempeiatuie, P = pi capitation, C = cloudiness Expiessed in tate of change of global mean sea level (mm/yi)

Source	T(+1°C)	P(+5%)	C (+5%)	Remarks
Ambach & Kuhn (1989)	+0 31	-0 13		Analysis of EGIG data
Bindschadler (1985)	+0 45			EGIG data/retreating margin
Braithwaite and Olesen (1990)	+0 36 to +0 48			Energy balance calculation
Oerlemans (1990)	+0 37	0 11	-0 06	Energy balance Model

uncertainty regarding the current state of balance of the ice sheet An imbalance of up to 30% of the annual mass turnover cannot be excluded

A lew studies have also been undertaken to detect changes in some selected area Along the EGIG line in central West Greenland, there is some indication ol slight thickening in the interior part of the ice sheet A study along the Oregon State University line in South Gieenland suggested a close balance between accumulation and ice discharge, at least in the interior part (Kostecka and Whillans, 1988)

On the basis of satellite altimetry Zwally (1989) found that the mass balance ol the southern part of the ice sheet has been positive in the period 1978 1986 He reports that thickening of the ice sheet occurred in both the ablation and accumulation zone (order of magnitude 0 2 nr/yr) Although theie aie doubts rcgaiding the accuracy ol the results (Douglas et al 1990) this work shows the enormous potential of radar altimetry to monitor changes on the Luge ice sheets

Most outlet glaciers for which observations exist (this is mainly in central and southern part of the west coast of Greenland) have retreated strongly over the last century (Weidick, 1984) As the retreat occurred in many regions, on a lelatively short time scale (100 years), and in a period of significant warming in Greenland, increased ablation rates must be responsible for this However, the large ablation zones of the inland ice must have suffered from this too The implications for past sea level rise will be discussed shortly

A few estimates have been made of the sensitivity of Greenland mass balance to climatic change They aie listed in Table 9 5 The method of Ambach and Kuhn (1989) is based on a new analysis of the EGIG data In their approach, the mass and energy budget at the equilibiium line is expanded with a linear perturbation technique, allowing the calculation of the change in the equilibuum-line altitude (dELA) associated with small changes in temperature, precipitation and radiation By extrapolating dELA to the entire ice sheet an estimate can then be made of the change in ablation and accumulation area and by

assigning mass-balance values of the total ice mass budget Bindschadler's (1985) calculation is based on the same mass-balance measurements, but a (minor) correction is made for a retreating ice margin The value listed as Oerlemans et al (1990) results from a straightforward sensitivity test with an energy balance model applied to four regions of the ice sheet Braithwaite and Olesen (1990) have used an energy balance model to study their ablation measurements in southwest Greenland, and attempted to extrapolate the result to the entire ablation zone There is a reasonable agreement between all those studies, but this is partly due to dependence of the input

Above, only temperature has been considered as a climatic input parameter In fact, changes in the seasonal cycle, in precipitation and cloud patterns have occurred and will occur in the future The potential importance of such factors can be studied by sensitivity tests, and some results have been listed in Table 9 5 It has been suggested that even in the relatively warm climate of Greenland, snow accumulation may increase when temperature goes up (e g , Reeh and Gundestrup 1985) If annual precipitation would increase uniformly by 5c/c per degree warming, the precipitation effect can offset about 30% of the temperature effect Setting the annual precipitation prop ortional to the amount of precipitable water in a saturated atmospheric column [see Oerlemans and Van der Veen, 1984, p 140] would imply, for mean conditions over the Greenland ice sheet, a 4% increase in precipitation for a 1°C warming This leads to a best estimate of the sensitivity of 0 3 ± 0 2 mm yr 1 per degree C The error bar is large because

i) There is considerable uncertainty on how precipitation patterns over Greenland will change in a warmer climate

n) It is unknown whethei iceberg calving from the outlet glaciers will increase due to increased basal water flow (Bindschadler, 1985) However the ice possibly involved in rapid retreat of calving fronts is almost afloat, so the contribution to sea level rise will be negligible Consequent thinning of grounded ice further upstream is not likely to affect sea level within the next 100 years

in) It is unknown how factors like surface albedo and cloudiness will change

With a record oi mean summer temperatuies the sensitivity can be used to produce an estimate ol Greenland s contribution to past sea level i ise As shown in Figure 9 5, the 1866-1980 summer temperatuie departures (relative to the 20-year aveiage for the leference period 1866-1885) shows an overall wanning ol about 0 5°C However the decadal changes are pionounced with a large warming ol about 2°C occumng up to 1930 35 and a cooling trend thereafter By summing the pioduct between

Figure 9.5: Summer (JJA) temperature (°C) as departures from reference period 1866 1885 averaged over Greenland The smoothed curve is a moving 10 year filter

the sensitivity value and the temperature departure for each year from 1880-1980, the 100-year contribution to sea level is estimated Assuming initial conditions in equilibrium and a sensitivity of 0 3 ± 0 2 mm yr 1 per degree, the summation yields 23 ± 16 mm (or 0 23 ± 0 16 mm yr 1) So the contribution from Greenland to past sea level rise appears to be somewhat less than that fiom glaciers and thermal expansion

9.4.5	The Antarctic Ice Sheet.

The question of balance of the Antarctic ice sheet proves to be a very difficult one From a physical point of view regarding the very long time scale introduced by geodynamics and thermomechanical coupling in the ice sheet, it seems unlikely that the present ice sheet has adjusted completely to the last glacial-interglacial transition A detailed modelling study by Huybrechts (1990), in which a glacial cycle of the Antaictic ice sheet is simulated on a 40km grid suggests that the large scale imbalance will not be ntoie than a few peiccnt of the annual mass turnover (corresponding to a rate ol sea level change of less than 0 1 mm yr 1) This does not exclude the possibility however that climate fluctuations with a shorter time scale have pushed the ice sheet out of balance Also there is increasing evidence that marine ice sheets like the West Antarctic could exhibit pulsating mass discharge which is not climate related but may have important consequences for sea level

Budd and Smith (1985) made an assessment ol the net balance by compiling a set of accumulation and ice velocity measurements (Table 9 6) The latter allow to make a rough estimate ol the ice discharge fiom the main ice sheet across the grounding line viz 1879 x 10' - kg/y i They find a number of about 2088 x 1012 kg/yi lor the accumulation and estimate the net balance to be positive b>

Table9.6 Antaictic mass balance (10^ k<>lM),t = without Antaictic Peninsula Piopei lefeiencefoi SPRI (Scott Polai Reseai ch Institute) map and data Diewis (1983)

	Flux at grounding line	Surface balance (grounded ice)	Net
Budd and Smith (1985)	-1879	2088	Oto+418
Digitization SPRI map Huybrechts  (1990)		2168	
Radok et al (1986)		2158  1765 t	
Giovinetto and Bentley (1985)		1468 t	
Fortum and Oerlemans (1990) [based on SPRI data]		1817	

209 x 1012 kg/yr This would correspond to a rate of sea level change of about -0 6 mm yr1 Subsequent estimates of the total accumulation have produced lower values Giovinetto and Bentley (1985) state that accumulation over the grounded part of the ice sheet is only 1468 x 1012kg/yr With the mean value lor discharge lrom above, this yields a net balance ol -411 x 10'2 kg/yr Fortum and Oerlemans (1990) find on the basis of a data set independently compiled horn the archives ol the Scott Polai Research Institute (SPRI) a mass gain at the suilace of 1817 x 10*2 kg/yr With the discharge number fiom Budd and Smith this then implies a net balance of 62 x 10*2 kg/yi

It must be stressed that the inleiencc of ice mass discharge from a limited numbci of suiface velocity measurements involves many uncertainties The latio of surface velocity to vertical mean velocity is such an unceitain factor More senously outflow velocities vary diamatically from point to point so lateral extrapolation and interpolation around the coast tntioduces very large eirors A comprehensive companson ol caihei estimates of the surface mass balance was given by Giovinetto and Bull (1987) Their discussion suggests that the total surface accumulation over grounded ice is not known to an accuracy better than 10% When considering the net balance, this figure will be worse

In conclusion, it is unknown whethci the Antarctic ice sheet is currently in balance and whether it has been conti lbuting to sea level use ovei the last 100 years oi not A 20% imbalance ol mass turnovei cannot be detected in a definite way iiom pi esent data

Seveial methods exist to investigate how accumulation on the Antaictic ice sheet may change when tempcialuie

changes Analysis of the gas content in the deep Antarctic ice cores gives an indication of how accumulation varied between glacial and interglacial conditions (Lorius et al,

1984,	Jouzel et al , 1989) In fact, it gives support to the view that accumulation on the interior is roughly proportional to the saturation mixing ratio of water vapour in the air above the inversion, as first suggested by Robin (1977) Another method involves regression analysis on measuied tcmpeiatuies and accumulation rates (Muszynski,

1985,	Foituin and Oeilemans 1990) Howevei it is not so cicai that a lelation between accumulation and temperatuie based on spatial vanation can be applied to climatic change It is also possible to use piecipitation rates as predicted by gencial cnculation models of the atmosphere Although the quality of these models has increased giadually, simulation of the climate of the polar regions still shows serious shortcomings (Schlesinger, 1990) and the tesults concerning glacier mass balance must be considered with much caution So far, a systematic companson between obscived accumulation on the ice sheets and output fiom such models has not yet been published

Table 9 7 lists a numbei of estimates of the change in Antarctic mass balance lor a uniform warming oi I degree C Muszynski s estimate is the highest a decrease of 0 38 mm/yr in sea level The multiple regression analysis icported in Foituin and Oerlemans (1990) yields a substantially lower value In this analysis, which was based on a much laigei newly compiled data set, a distinction was made between ice shelves escarpment region and intei lor Accumulation is strongly related to both tempeiatuie and latitude parameteis which also have a high mutual

Table 9.7 Estimates of the change in Antaictic mass balance fot a 1 °C Maiming Aqs lepiesents saturation Mate/ sapoui mixing ratio of an above the invasion

Source	Change in sea level (mm/yr)	Remarks
Muszynski (1985)	-0 38	Regression on 208 data points
Fortum and Oerlemans (1990)	-0 139 (interior)  -0 061 (escaroment)  -0 200 (total)	Regression on 486 data points (only grounded ice)
Proportional to water vapour mixing ratio	-0 34	20 km grid over grounded ice

correlation Taking this correlation out leads to a significantly weaker temperature dependence of the accumulation, but it can be argued that this approach is preferable when considering climate sensitivity The value listed under "proportional to water vapour mixing ratio" was calculated by integrating over a 20km grid coveting the entire ice sheet with temperatures extrapolated lrom the data set used in the multiple regiession mentioned above The values thus obtained are lather close to the one suggested by Muszynski s work

Support for the idea that higher temperatuies will lead to significantly largei accumulation also comes fiom observations on the Antarctic Peninsula Over the past 30 yeais temperature has gone up here by almost 2°C, wheicas accumulation increased by as much as 25% in paiallel with this (Peel and Mulvaney, 1988) Although this cannot be taken as proof of a causal relationship it is in line with the sensitivity estimates listed in Table 9 7 which span a lactoi of two

In summary, all quoted studies show an mciease in accumulation with warming and thus a decrease in sea level An ablation zone does not effectively exist in Antarctica, and a laige wanning would be icquired in older for ablation to influence mass balance

9.4.6	Possible Instability of The West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Most of the early attention to the issue of sea level use and greenhouse warming was lelated to the stability ol the West Antarctic ice sheet Paits of this ice sheet are grounded far below sea level and may be very sensitive to small changes in sea level or melting iates at the base ol adjacent ice shelves (eg Mcicei 1978 Thomas et al 1979, Lingle 1985 Van dei Veen 1986) In case ol a climatic warming such melting iates could mciease and lead to disappearance ol ice rises (places wheie the 1 loating ice shelf runs aground) Reduced back stiess on the main

ice sheet and larger ice velocities may result, with subsequent thinning of the grounded ice and grounding-line retreat

It is hard to make quantitative statements about this mechanism Several attempts have been made to model this ice sheet shelf system and to study its sensitivity (Thomas et al, 1979 Lingle, 1985, Van der Veen 1986,1987 Budd et al , 1987) Van der Veen (1986), in a lathei extensive study, concludes that the earlier estimates of the sensitivity of West Antarctica weie too large Budd et al (1987) also give an extensive discussion on the response ol the West Antaictic ice sheet to a climatic waiming Then con sideiations are based on a laigc numbei ol numencal experiments with How band models According to these experiments veiy laigc ice-shelf thinning iates (10 to 100 times piesent values) would be iequned to cause iapid disintegiation of the West Antaictic ice sheet Foi a probably more realistic situation ol a 50V mciease in ice shell thinning iate for a one-degiee wanning (older ol magnitude) the associated sea level use would be about 0 lmm/yi foi the coming decades

Much ol the drainage of the West Antarctic ice sheet goes thiough a number ol last flowing ice stieams the dynamics of which were not pioperly included in the modelling studies mentioned above In i ecent yeais it has become clear from new observational studies (e g Bentley, 1987 Alley et al 1987 MacAyeal 1989) that those ice streams show much vailability on a centuiy and may be even decadal time scale Although much of this variability is probably not related directly to climate change it demonstrates the potential of this pait of the ice sheet to ieact quickly to anv change in boundaiy conditions A comprehensive model of the ice stieams and then intciaction with the main ice body does not yet exist unioitunately Still as aigued by D R MacAycal (abstract to the 1989-Amencan Geophysical Union meeting on sea

Table 9.8 Estimated conti ibutions to sea-le\ el i ise ovei the last 100 yeais (mem)

	LOW	BEST  ESTIMATE	HIGH
Thermal expansion	2	4	6
Glaciers/small ice caps	1 5	4	7
Greenland Ice Sheet	1	25	4
Antarctic Ice Sheet	-5	0	5
TOTAL	-0 5	10 5	22
OBSERVED	10	15	20

level change, unpublished), an extreme limit of the response of the West Antarctic ice sheet to greenhouse warming can be estimated In his view the accelerated discharge of ice only occurs in the regions where sufficient sub-glacial sediments (the lubricant for the ice streams) is present For a typical greenhouse warming scenario, the bulk of the increased mass outflow would occur between 100 and 200 years from now, and the actual projected West Antarctic contribution to sea level rise would be -10 cm alter 100 yrs (increase in surface accumulation still dominating), +40 cm after 200 yrs, and +30 cm after 300 yrs (ice stream discharge stopped)

In summary, there is no firm evidence to suggest that the Antarctic ice sheet in general or the West Antarctic ice sheet in particular, have contributed either positively or negatively to past sea level rise On the whole, the sensitivity of Antarctica to climatic change is such that a luture warming should lead to inci eased accumulation and thus a negative contribution to sea level change

9.4.7	Other Possible Contributions

Sea level could also have been affected by net increases or decreases in surface and groundwater storage In particular, groundwater depletion (through pumping) and drainage of swamps, soils and wetlands would contribute to a MSL rise On the other hand, increases in surface storage capacity - especially large dams but also the combined effects of many small reservoirs and farm ponds - would detract from sea level

Decreases in groundwater levels are commonly reported from all over the world from many different environments This suggests that total groundwater storage volumes have

been diminishing, particularly during the last 50 years Data are meagre, however One rough estimate (Meier, 1983, also see Robin, 1986) is that, globally, net depletion has amounted to about 2000km3 (equivalent to 0 55cm in sea level) during this century Land drainage, particularly in Northwest Europe and North America over the last 100 years, has reduced soil and shallow groundwater storage over wide areas, but the actual amounts of water are difficult to estimate

Substantial increases in surface storage have occurred since the 1930s Newman and Fairbridge (1986) estimated that this has amounted to about 18750km^ (-5 2cm in sea level, using 362 x 106km2 for ocean area) over the period 1932-1982 Golubev (1983, Also see Robin, 1986), however, makes a much lower estimate, 5500km3 (-1 5cm in sea level)

Overall, the estimates appear too imprecise and the data insufficient, especially for groundwater changes, to be able to conclude much about the possible net effects on past sea level rise

9.4.8	Synthesis

The estimated contributions to past sea level rise can now be summarised (Table 9 8) Assuming the contribution from Antarctica has been zero, the combined contributions from thermal expansion, mountain glaciers and the Greenland ice sheet over the last 100 years total 10 5cm This is within the range of observed sea level rise (10 -20cm), albeit at the lower end The range of uncertainty is large -0 5cm to 22cm

Table 9.9 Estimates of future global sea level rise (cm) (Modified from Raper et al., 1990)

CONTRIBUTING FACTORS					TOTAL RISE a		
	Thermal  Expansion	Alpine	Greenland	Antarctica	Best Estimate	Range	To (Year)
Gomitz (1982)	20	20 (Combined)			40		2050
Revelle (1983)	30	12	13		71 b		2080
Hoffman et al.  (1983)	28 to 115	28 to 230 (Combined)				56 to 345  26 to 39	2100  2025
PRB(1985)	c	10 to 30	10 to 30	-10 to 100		10 to 160	2100
Hoffman et al. (1986)	28 to 83	12 to 37	6 to 27	12 to 220		58 to 367  10 to 21	2100  2025
Robin (1986) d	30 to 60 d	20±12d	to+10d	to -10d	801	25 - 165 '	2080
Thomas (1986)	28 to 83	14 to 35	9 to 45	13 to 80	100	60 to 230	2100
Villach (1987) (Jaeger, 1988) d					30	-2 to 51	2025
Raper et al.  (1990)	4 to 18	2 to 19	1 to 4	-2 to 3	21 S	5 to 44 S	2030
Oerlemans (1989)					20	0 to 40	2025
Van der Veen  (1988)h	8 to 16	10 to 25	Oto 10	-5 to 0		28 to 66	2085

a - from the 1980s

b - total includes additional 17cm for trend extrapolation

c - not considered

d - for global warming of 3.5°C

- extreme ranges, not always directly comparable

§ - internally consistent synthesis of components

h - for a global warming of 2-4°C

1 - estimated from global sea level and temperature change from 1880-1980 and global warming of 3.5±2.0°C for 1980-2080

9.5	How Might Sea Level Change in the Future?

Various estimates of future sea level rise are noted in Table 9.9. Such estimates are very difficult to compare because different time periods are chosen, and because assumptions icgarding futuie greenhouse gas concentrations, changes in climate, response times, etc., are either different or not clearly stated. In general, most of the studies in Table 9.9 foresee a sea level rise ol somewhcie between 10cm and

30cm over the next four decades. This represents a rate of rise that is significantly faster than that experienced, on average, over the last 100 years.

Projections for the present assessment are made using the standard 1PCC greenhouse gas foicing scenarios. These consist of a "Business-as-Usual" scenario, and thiee lower scenarios (B-D) in which greenhouse gas emissions aie substantially reduced. Three projections arc made lor

each scenario (12 projections in total) reflecting the high, low and best-estimate assumptions for each of the contributing factors, as described below

9.5.1	Methods and Assumptions

Estimates of the thermal expansion effects are obtained using the upwelling-diffusion model of Wigley and Raper (1987) described in 9 4 1 and in Section 6 For each scenario, the model is run using a climate sensitivity (AT2x) °f 1 5°C, 2 5°C and 4 5°C for the low, best-estimate and high projections, respectively, with the diffusivity set to 0 63cm2sec‘l and n set to 1 (see Section 6 foi the justification ol the choice of diffusivity and n values)

Concerning glaciers and small ice caps, significant warming may decrease the ice-covered area within a hundred years Thus, in order to make realistic estimates of the glacier contribution, the changes in glacier area have to be taken into account This is accomplished using a simple, global glacier melt model (Raper et al , 1990) The model contains three parameters that have to be prescribed initial ice volume, a global-mean glacier lesponse time and a representative glacier temperature sensitivity parameter The parameter values were chosen to match estimated rates ol glacier volume loss over the last 100 years The model was run from 1861 to 2100 (implying that, at present, glaciers are in disequilibrium)

With respect to the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets (including the West Antarctic ice sheet and the Antarctic Peninsula), the dynamic response can effectively be ignored for the time-scales considered here The static changes in the surface mass balance can thus be represented by the sensitivity values discussed above, that is

Ah = 0 3 ± 0 2mm/yr per degree for the Greenland ice sheet

Ah = -0 3 ± 0 3mm/yr per degree for the Antarctic ice sheet

Based on the latest results from transient runs of fully-coupled ocean-atmosphere GCM's (Stouffer et al , 1989), it was assumed that tempeiature changes were equivalent to the global mean, except in Greenland where temperature changes were enhanced by a factor of 1 5

9.5.2	Discussion

The resultant projections of global sea level rise to the year 2100 are shown in Figures 9 6 and 9 7 Under the Business-as-Usual scenano, the best estimate is that, for the year 2030, global sea level would be 18cm higher than today Given the stated range of uncertainty in the contributing factors, the rise could be as little as 8cm or as high as 29cm By the year 2070, the projected range is 21-71cm with a best-estimate of 44cm, although it should be cautioned that projections this far into the future are fraught with many uncertainties, many of which are external to thermal expansion and land ice melting

The major contributing factors to the sea level rise are thermal expansion of the oceans and glaciers and small ice caps The minor conti ibutions to sea level from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets are positive and negative, respectively (Table 9 10)

Foi scenarios B, C and D (Figure 9 7), the sets of projections are similar This is because with low forcing scenarios, the temperature and sea level effects are more sensitive to AT2X and the history of forcing change up to 1990 than to forcing change post-1990 The best-estimates for the year 2070 fall in the range 27-33cm, about one-third less than the Business-as-Usual case

The fact that sea level continues to rise throughout the 21st century - even under scenarios of strict emission reductions demonstrates the strong effect of past changes in greenhouse gas concentrations on future climate and sea level This is because of the lag effects introduced by the thermal inertia of the oceans and the continuing response of land ice to climate changes In effect, this creates a very substantial sea level rise "commitment" This is illustrated

Table 9.10 Factois contnbutini> to sea level use (cm), 1985 - 2030 "Business-as-Usual" Scenano - Best Estimate foi 2030

	Thermal Expansion	Mountain  Glaciers	Greenland	Antarctica	TOTAL
HIGH	14 9	10 3	37	00	28 9
BEST ESTIMATE	10 1	70	1 8	-0 6	183
LOW	68	2 3	05	08	87

Figure 9.6: Global sea-level rise, 1990-2100, for Policy Scenario Business-as-Usual

100

0

CO

<D

"S E

“50

High

Low

2000

2025

2075

2100

Figure 9.7: Global sea-level rise, 1990-2100, for Policy Scenarios B, C, D

Best estimate

2050 Year

in Figure 9 8 Here, the IPCC "Business-as-Usual" Scenario of greenhouse forcing is imposed to the year 2030 with no further changes in forcing thereafter Sea level, however, continues to rise at almost the same rate for the remainder of the century

This section has been concerned primarily with global mean sea level rise It should be borne in mind that sea level will not rise umfoimly around the woi kl Fust at any given coastal location sea level will be influenced by local and regional vertical land movements In some circumstances, these aie huge and will mask climate related changes in ocean volume Second, dynamic

processes in the ocean and atmospheric circulation will also cause sea level to change regionally For example, a sensitivity study with a dynamic ocean model showed regional differences of up to a factor of two relative to the global-mean value (Mikolajewicz et al , 1990) Finally, changes in the frequency of extreme sea level events may be most important in their impact on coastal zones, but are currently difficult to quantify because of the uncertainties in iegional picdictions of climatic change

In general for the coming decades the present best estimate projection of sea level rise foi the Business as-

Figure 9.8: Commitment to sea level rise in the year 2030 The curve shows the sea level rise due to Business-as-Usual emissions to 2030, with the additional rise that would occur in the remainder of the century even if climate forcing was stabilised in 2030

Usual case does not represent a major departure from those found in the most recent literature (Table 9 9)

9.6	Summary and Conclusions

This chapter has addressed three questions

Has global-mean sea level been rising over the last 100 years9

What are the causal factors that could explain a past rise in sea level9 and,

What increases in sea level can be expected in the future9

The array of data and methodological problems inherent in estimating the rate of past sea level change is large The selection of data and its manipulation can make a difference of more than a factor of two in the global trend estimate While recent analyses of MSL trends involve more refined means of data correction and analysis, they generally support, not alter, the broad conclusions of previous assessments It is our judgement that

Global sea level has been rising

The average rate of rise over the last 100 years has been 10-2 Omm/yr

There is no firm evidence of an acceleration in global MSL rise over this century (although there is some evidence that sea level rose taster in this century compared to the previous two centuries)

It appears that the past rise in sea level is due largely to thermal expansion of the oceans and increased melting of glaciers and the margins of the Greenland ice sheet There is no firm basis tor supposing that the Antarctic ice sheet has contributed either positively or negatively to past sea level change In general, these findings support the conclusion, based on analyses oi tide gauge records that

there has been a globally-coherent, secular rise in sea level, and that the causes are most likely related to climatic change

Futui e changes in sea level were estimated for each of the IPCC forcing scenarios For each scenario, three projections - best estimate, high and low - were made corresponding to the estimated range of uncertainty in each of the potential contributing factors, and in the climate sensitivity and resulting global warming predictions

It is found that

For the 'Busincss-as-Usual" Scenario at year 2030, global-mean sea level is 8-29cm higher than today, with a best-estimate of 18cm At the year 2070, the rise is 21-7 lcm, with a best-estimate of 44cm

Most of the contribution is estimated to derive from thermal expansion of the oceans and the increased melting of mountain glaciers

The Antarctic ice sheet contributes negatively to sea level due to increased accumulation associated with warming Increased outflow of ice from the West Antarctic ice sheet is likely to be limited, but the uncertainty is large

The Greenland ice sheet contributes positively to sea level rise, but part of the enhanced melting and runoff may be offset by increased snowfall in the higher parts, so the uncertainties are very large

For the lower forcing scenarios (B,C and D), the sea level rise projections are similar, at least until the mid-21st century On average these projections are approximately one-third lower than those of the "Business-as-Usual" Scenario

Even with substantial decreases in the emissions of the major greenhouse gases lutuic increases in sea level are unavoidable - a sea level rise commitment' - due to lags in the climate system

In general, this review concludes that a rise of more than 1 metre over the next century is unlikely Even so, the rate of rise implied by the Business-as-Usual best-estimate is 36 times faster than that experienced over the last 100 years The prospect of such an increase in the rate of sea level rise should be of major concern to many low-lying coasts subject to permanent and temporary inundation, salt intrusion, cliff and beach erosion, and other deleterious effects

References

Alley, R B , D D Blankenship, S T Rooney and C R Bentley (1987) Till beneath ice stream B 4 A coupled ice-till flow model J Geophxs Res 92,8931 8940

Ambach, W (1963) Untersuchungen sum Energieumsatz in der Ablationszone des Gronlandischen Inlandeises Meddelelsei irn Gionland 174(4), 311 pp

Ambach, W (1979) Zur Nettoeisablation in einem Hohenprofil am Gronlandischen Inlandeis Polaifoi schunit 49 55 62

Ambach, W and M Kuhn (1989) Altitudinal shift of the equilibrium line in Greenland calculated from heat balance characteristics In J Oerlemans (ed ) Glaciei Fluctuations and Climatic Chani’c Kluwer (Dordrecht) pp 281-288

Aubrey, DG (1985) Recent sea levels from tide gauges problems and prognosis In Glaciei s he Sheets and Sea Lexel Effect of a CO2 induced climatic chantfe DOE/ER/60235-1 (U S Department of Energy Carbon Dioxide Research Division, Washington) pp 73-91

Barnett, TP (1983) Recent changes in sea level and then possible causes Chm Chani’c 5 15 38

Barnett, T P (1984) Estimation of global sea level change a problem of uniqueness / Geophss Res 89 7980 7988

Barnett, TP (1985) Long term climatic change in observed physical properties of the oceans In De tec tine; the Climatic Effects of Inc 1 easins’Ccnbon Dioxide (Eds MC MacCiacken andFM Luther) US DOE/ER 0235 pp 91 107

Barnett, T P (1988) Global sea level change In NCPO Climate sanations ox ei the past cental x and the cpccnhousc effect A report based on the First Climate Trends Workshop 7 9 September 1988 Washington D C National Climate Program Office/NOAA, Rockville Maryland

Bauer A (1968) Nouvelle estimation du bilan de masse de

1 Inlandsis du Greenland Deep Sea Res 14 13-17

Bader, H (1961) 1he Giccnland Ice Sheet Cold Region Science and Engineering Report, I B2

Benson, C S (1962) Stiatupaphic studies tn the snem andfiinof the Gi eenland tee sheet SIPRE Res Report no 70

Bentley, C R (1987) Antarctic ice streams a review I Geophss Res 92,8843-8858

Bindschadler, R A (1985) Contribution of the Greenland Ice Cap to changing sea level present and future In Glaciei s Ice Sheets and Sea Lexel Effects of a CO2 induced climatic chani>e National Academy Press (Washington) pp 258 266 Bj'ornsson, H , (1979) Nine glacieis in Iceland /oGz//, 29, 7480

Bolin B B Doos J Jager and RA Warrick (Eds) 1 he Gt eenhouse Effect Climatic Change and Ecoss stems SCOPF 29 John Wiley and Sons (Chichester)

Braithwaite RG and O B Oleson (1989) Ice ablation in Wesi Greenland in relation to air temperature and global radiation Zettschi Gletscheik Glazialifeol 20,155 168

Braithwaite RG and O B Oleson (1989) Calculation of glaciei ablation from air temperature West Greenland In J Oerlemans (ed ) Glaciei Fluctuations and Climatic Change Kluwer (Dordrecht), pp 219-234

Braithwaite, R G and O B Oleson (1990) Increased ablation at the margin of the Greenland ice sheet under a greenhouse effect climate Annals oj Glacloloips 14 in press

Budd, W F B J Mclnnes, D Jenssen and I N Smith (1987) Modelling the response of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet to 1 climatic warming In Dsnamics of the WesZ Antaictic Ice Sheet, (Eds , C J van der Veen and J Oerlemans) Reidel pp 321-358

Budd W F and I N Smith (1985) The state of balance of the Antarctic Ice Sheet an updated assessment 1984 In Glacieis lee Sheets and Sea Lexel Effects of a CO-> indue ed Climatic Chaitt’e National Academy Press (Washington) pp 172 177

Carter, WE D G Aubrey, T Baker, C Boucher C LeProvost D Pugh, W R Peltier M Zumberge R H Rapp R E Schutz KO Emery and D B Enfield (1989) Geodetic hxini’ofliclc Gaiiye Bench Maiks Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Technical Report WHOI 89-31

Douglas B C RE Cheney, L Miller, R W Agreen, W E Cartel and D S Robertson (1990) Greenland ice sheet is it growing or shrinking’ Science, in press

Drewry D , (1983) Antaictica Glaciolot’ical and Geophysical

Folio Scott Polar Research Institute Cambridge UK

Ekman M (1988) The worlds longest continued series of sea level observations, Pine and App Geoplixs 127, 73-77

Flint RF (1971) Glacial and Quaternary Geology John Wiley New York 892pp

Fortum J PF and J Oerlemans (1990) Parametenzaiion ol the annual surface temperature and mass balance of Antarctica

Annals of Glac lolot’x 14 in press

Giovinetto, M B and C R Bentley (1985) Surface balance in icc drainage systems of Antarctica Antaictic louinal of the United States 20 6-13

Giovinetto MB and C Bull (1987) Summais and analysis of stuface mass balance compilations Joi Antaictica I960 19<S5 Byrd Polar Research Center Rep no 1 90pp

Golubev GN (1983) Economic activity water iesouices and the environment a challenge for hydrology Hsdiol Sei I 28 57-75

Gornitz, V (1990) Mean sea level changes in the recent past In Climate and Sea Lexel Change Obsei rations Pt ope turns and Implications, (Eds, RA Warrick and TML Wigley) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (in press)

Gornitz, V and A Solow (1989) Observations of long term tide gauge records for indications of accelerated sea level rise Workshop on Greenhouse Gas Induced Climatic Change May 8-12 1989 University of Massachusetts Amherst MA

Gornitz. V and S Lcbedeff (1987) Global sea level changes during the past century In Sea lc\c I fluctuation anil coastal esolution. (Eds D Nummedal, O H Pilkey and J D Howard) SEPM Special Publication No 41

Gornitz, V , S Lebedefl and J Hansen (1982) Global sea level trends in the past century Science 215,1611 1614

Greuell, W (1989) Glac ieis and climate enci t>s balance studies and numcnical modellint’ of the Instanced fiont Mutations of the Hintei eisfet net (Austiia) PhD Thesis University oi Utrecht (The Netherlands), 178 pp

Grove. J M (1988) The Little Ice At>e Methuen (London)

Haeberli, W , H Bosch, K Scheller. G 0strem and C C Wallen (1989) Woild Glactei lnxentots Status /9<S’<S’ IAHS(ICSI) UNEP-UNESCO

Haeberli W,P Mullet, P Alean and II Bosch (1989) Glacier changes following the little ice age A survey of the international data basis and its perspectives In Glacict I ha Illations and < lunatic chant’c (Ed J Oeilemans), Reidel (Dordrecht), pp 77 101

Hoffert, M I and B P Flannery (1985) Model projections of the time-dependent response to incieasing caibon dioxide In Pio/ectint! the Climatic Effects of Incteasint’ Cat bon Dioxide (Eds, M C MacCiacken and F M Luthei), US Depaitmentof Energy, Carbon Dioxide Research Division, pp 149 190

Hoffman, J S , J B Wells and J G Titus (1986) Future global warming and sea level rise In Iceland Coastal and Risen Symposium, (Ed G Sigbjarnason), Reykjavik National Energy Authority, 245-266

Hoffman, J S , D Keyes and J G litus(1983) Pi o/ec tins’ Putin e Sea Les el Rise Methodology Tstimates to the Yen/ 2100 and Reseatch Needs, US GPO O55-OOO-O236-3 GPO, Washington, D C

Huybrechts, Ph (1990) The Antaictic ice sheet duung the last glacial-interglacial cycle a 3-D model expenment Annals of Glue lolotts 14, in press

Jaeger, J (1988) Developing policies tot iesponding to climatic change a summary of the discussions and recommendations ol the woikshops held in Villach 1987 and Bellagio 1987 WMO/TD-No 225

Jouzel, J and 9 others (1989) A companson of deep Antarctic ice coies and their implications lot climate between 65,000 and 15,000 years ago Quat Res 31 135 150

Kasser, P (1967) Fluctuations oj Glaclets 1959 1965 Vol I IASII(ICS1)-UNESCO

Kasser, P (1973) Fluctuations of Glac lets 1965-1970 Vol II IASH(1CSI)-UNESCO

Kasser P and W Haeberli (eds) (1979) Du Schweiz mid due Gletschei Von den Eiszeit bis zm Gei’cmwait Kummerly und Fiei, Betn

Kostecka, J M and 1 M Whillans (1988) Mass balance along two transects of the west side of the Greenland ice sheet / Glac iolot;y, 34, 31 39

Kuhn. M (1990) Contribution ot glaciers to sea level rise In Climate and Sea Les el Cliant>e Obscnsations Ptojections and Implications (Eds, RA Warnck and TML Wigley) Cambndge Umveisity Press, Cambridge (in press)

Lingle C S (1985) A model ot a polar ice stream and future sea level use due to possible drastic retreat of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet In Glac lets Ice Sheets and Sea Lcscl I fleets of a

CO~> induced Climatic Change National Academy Press (Washington), pp 317 330

Lorius, C , D Raynaud J R Petit, J Jouzel and L Merlivat (1984) Late glacial maximum Holocene atmospheric and ice thickness changes fionr ice core studies Annals of Glaciology 5, 88 94

MacAyeal, DR (1989) Ice shelf response to ice-stream discharge fluctuations III The effects of ice-stream imbalance on the Ross Ice Shelf, Antarctica J Glaciology, 35, 38-42

MacCracken, MC and FM Luther (Eds) Detec tins’ the Climatic Effc its of Inc i easins’ Cai bon Dioxide, U S DOE/ER-0235

Meier M F (1983) Snow and ice in a changing hydiological world Hychol Sc l 28 3-22

Meier, M F (1984) Contribution of small glaciers to global sea level Science 226, 1418-1421

Mercer, JH (1978) West Antarctic ice sheet and CO2 greenhouse effect a threat of disaster Natme 271, 321-325

Mikolajewicz, U , B Santer and E Maier-Reimer (1990) Ocean response to greenhouse wanning Max Planck-Institut fur Meteorologie, Report 49

Muller F (1977) Fluctuations of Glacieis 1970-1975 Vol III IASH(ICSI)-UNESCO

Newman WS and R W Fanbndge (1986) The management of sea level rise Natme 320, 319 321

Oerlemans, J (1989) A projection of future sea level Climatic Change 15 151-174

Oerlemans, J (1990) A model for the surfacebalance of ice masses Parti Alpine glaciers Z Gletschcnk Glazcalqeol, submitted

Oerlemans J,R van de Wai and L A Conrads (1990) A model loi the sui lacebalance of ice masses Part II Application to the Gieenland ice sheet Z Gletscheik Glaztalc’eol, submitted

Oerlemans, J and CJ van der Veen (1984) Ice sheets and climate Reidel (Dordrecht) 217 pp

Ohmura, A (1987) New temperature distribution maps for Greenland Z Gletschcnk Glazial^eol 23, 1-45

Ohmura A and N Reeh (1990) New piecipitation and accumulation maps for Greenland J Glac loloqy, submitted

0strem, G, O Liestpl and B Wold (1977) Glaciological investigations at Nigardbreen, Norway Noisk Geot’i Tisddki, 30 187 209

Peel, D A and R Mulvaney (1988) Air temperature and snow accumulation in the Antarctic Peninsula during the past 50 years Annals of Glac tolot’y 11,206 207

Peltier WR and A M Tushingham (1989) Global sea level rise and the greenhouse effect might they be connected’ Science 244, 806 810

Peltier, W R and AM Tushingham (1990) The influence of glacial isostatic adjustment on tide gauge measurements of secular sea level I Geophys Res, (in press)

Pirazzoii, P A , D R Grant and P Woodworth (1987) Trends of relative sea level change past, present and future XII International INQUA Congress, Ottawa, July 31-August 9, 1987 Special Session 18 'Global Change'

Pugh, DT, N E Spencer and PL Woodworth (1987) Data holdings of the Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level Bidston, Birkenhead Permanent SErvice for Mean Sea Level, 156pp

Pugh, D T (1990) Improving sea level data In Climate and Sea Lexel Change Obsei sations Piojeetions anti Implications, (Eds , R A Warrick and T M L Wigley) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (in press)

Radok, U , Barry, R G , Jenssen, D , Keen, R A , Kiladis, G N and Mclnnes, B (1982) Climatic anti Phy steal Chai acteiistics of the Greenland lee Sheet, CIRES, University of Colorado, Boulder

Radok, U , T J Brown D Jenssen 1 N Smith and W F Budd (1986) On the Sm ip/ig Potential oj Polcu Ice Stiearns Pail IV Antaietie Ice Accumulation Basins and then mam Disc hinge Regions CIRES, Boulder / University of Melbourne Rep DE/ER/60197 5

Raper, S C B , R A Warrick and T M L Wigley (1990) Global sea level rise past and future In Pioceedmgs oj the SCOPE Wmkshop on Rising Sea I esc! and Subsiding Coastal Aieas, Bangkok 1988, (Ed J D Milliman) John Wiley and Sons (Chichester), in press

Reeh, N (1985) Greenland ice sheet mass balance and sea level change In Glacicis lcc Sheets and Sea Lexel Effects oj a CO2 induced Climatic Chant’e National Academy Press, (Washington), pp 155-171

Reeh, N and N S Gundestrup (1985) Mass balance of the Greenland ice sheet at Dye 3 J Glaciology, 31, 198-200

Revelle, R (1983) Probable luture changes m sea level resulting from increased atmospheric carbon dioxide In NAS Changing Climate, pp 433 447 NAS (Washington D C )

Robin, G de Q (1977) Ice cores and climatic change Phil Tians R Sot London, Series B, 280, 143-168

Robin, G de Q (1986) Changing the sea level In The Greenhouse Effect Climatic Change and Ecosystems, (Eds ,B Bolin, B Doos J Jager and R A Warrick) John Wiley and Sons (Chichester) pp 323-359

Roemmich, D (1985) Sea level and the thermal variability of the ocean In Glaciers Ice Sheets and Sea Level Effects of a CO2-mdiiced Climatic Change National Academy Press, (Washington), pp 104-115

Stouffer, R J , S Manabe and K Biyan(1989) Interhemispheric asymmetry in climate response to a gradual increase of atmospheric CCD Naim c 342 pp 660-662

Thomas, R H , T J D Sanderson and K E Rose (1979) Effects of a climatic warming on the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Natme, 227, 355 358

Thomson, R E and S Tabata (1987) Stenc height trends of ocean station PAPA in the northeast Pacific Ocean Manne Geodess 11,103-113

Trupin, A and J Wahe, 1990 Spectroscopic analysis of global tide guage sea level data Geophss 1 Int, 100,441-454

Van der Veen, C J (1986) Ice Sheets Atmospheiic CO2 and Sea Les el, PhD Thesis University of Utrecht (The Netherlands)

Van der Veen, CJ (1987) Longitudinal stresses and basal sliding a comparative study In Dynamics of the West Antaietie Ice Sheet (Eds CJ van der Veen and J Oerlemans), Reidel, 223 248

Van der Veen. C J (1988) Projecting futuie sea level Sms m Geophss 9 389 418

Vivian, R (1975) Lts Glatieis des Alpts Occidentalcs Alliei Grenoble

Weidick A (1984) Review of glacier changes in West Greenland Z Gletsclieik Glazialgeol 21 301-309

Wigley, T M L and S C B Raper (1987) Theimal expansion ol sea water associated with global warming Natme 330 127 131

Wigley, T M L and S C B Raper (1990) Futuie changes in global mean temperature and thermal expansion related sea level rise In Climate and Sea Lesel Change Obscisations Piojeetions and Implications, (Eds , R A Warrick and T M L Wigley), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (in press)

Woodworth, PL (1990) A search for accelerations in records ol European mean sea level Intel national I Climatology 10 129-143

Zwally, HJ (1989) Growth of Greenland ice sheet Interpretation Science, 246, 1589-1591

10

Effects on Ecosystems

J.M. MELILLO, T.V. CALLAGHAN, F.I. WOODWARD, E. SALATI, S.K. SINHA

Contributors:

J. Aber; V. Alexander; J. Anderson; A. Auclair; F. Bazzaz; A. Breymeyer; A. Clarke;

C.	Field; J.P. Grime; R. Gifford; J. Goudrian; R. Harris; I. Heaney; P. Holligan;

P. Jarvis; L. Joyce; P. Levelle; S. Linder; A. Linkins; S. Long; A. Lugo, J. McCarthy, J. Morison; H. Nour; W. Oechel; M. Phillip; M. Ryan; D. Schimel; W. Schlesinger;

G. Shaver; B. Strain; R. Waring; M. Williamson.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary	287	10.2.2.2.3	Decomposition  10.2.2.2.4	Models of ecosystem response to	295
10.0 Introduction	289	climate change	296
		10.2.2.3 Large-scale migration of biota	298
10.1 Focus	289	10.2.2.3.1 Vegetation-climate relationships	298
		10.2.2.3.2 Palaeo-ecological evidence	298
10.2 Effects of Increased Atmospheric CO2 and		10.2.2.4 Summary	299
Climate Change on Terrestrial Ecosystems	289		
10.2.1 Plant and Ecosystem Responses to		10.3 The Effects of Terrestrial Ecosystem Changes	
Elevated CCb	289	on the Climate System	300
10.2.1.1 Plant responses	289	10.3.1 Carbon Cycling in Terrestrial Ecosystems	300
10.2.1.1.1 Carbon budget	289	10 3.1 1 Deforestation in the Tropics	300
10.2.1.1.2 Interactions between carbon dioxide and		10.3.1 2 Forest regrowth m the mid-latitudes of	
temperature	290	the Northern Hemisphere	301
10.2.1.1.3 Carbon dioxide and environmental		10 3.1.3 Eutrophication and toxification in the	
stress	290	mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere	301
10.2.1.1.4 Phenology and senescence	291	10.3.2 Reforestation as a Means of Managing	
10.2.1.2 Community and ecosystem responses to		Atmospheric CO?	301
elevated carbon dioxide	291	10 3 3 Methane and Nitrous Oxide Fluxes	301
10.2.1.2.1 Plant-plant interactions	291	10 3 3 1 Methane	302
10.2.1.2.2 Interactions between plants and animals	291	10 3 3.2 Nitrous oxide	302
10.2.1.2.3 Interaction between plants and microbes	291	10.3.4 Ecosystem Change and Regional	
10.2.1.2.4 Decomposition	291	Hydrologic Cycles	303
10.2.1.2.5 Whole-ecosystem exposure to elevated		10 3.5 Summary	304
carbon dioxide	292		
10.2.1.3 Summary	292	10.4 Marine Ecosytems and Climate Change	304
10.2.2 Plant and Ecosystem Responses to Changes		10.4.1 Climate Change and Community Response	304
in Temperature and Moisture	294	10.4.2 Interaction Between the Land and the Ocean	305
10.2.2.1 Plant responses to changes in temperature		10.4.3 Interactions Between the Ocean and the	
and moisture	294	Atmosphere	305
10.2.2.1.1 Carbon budget	294	10.4.4 The Carbon System and the Biological Pump	305
10.2.2.1.2 Phenology and senescence	294	10.4.5 Summary	306
10.2.2.2 Community and ecosystem responses	295		
10.2.2.2.1 Plant community composition	295	References	306
10.2.2.2.2 Interactions between plants and animals	295		

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Ecosystem Metabolism and Climate Change

Photosynthesis, plant and microbial respiration tend to increase with increasing temperatures, but at higher temperatures respiration is often the more sensitive process As a consequence, global warming may result in a period of net release of carbon from the land to the atmosphere The magnitude of this release is uncertain Factors that will influence the amount of caibon released include local patterns of climate change and the responses of the biota to simultaneous changes in soil moisture and atmospheric CO2 concentration

Increased soil water availability will tend to stimulate plant growth in dry ecosystems and mciease carbon storage in cold and wet ecosystems like lowland tundra A number of recent modelling studies have predicted that water stress will be a primary cause of tree death in the southern temperate forests of the Northern Hemisphere as climate changes Forest death and replacement by grasslands would lesult in a net flux of caibon from the terrestrial biosphere to the atmosphere

Increased atmosphenc CO2 has the potential to inciease plant growth in a variety of ways stimulation of photosynthesis depression of respiration relief of water and low light stresses relief of nutrient stress by several mechanisms (greater nutrient use efficiency, increased nutrient uptake through root-microbial associations, increased symbiotic nitrogen fixation), and delay ol senescence that prolongs the giowing season Some of the mechanisms that promote incieased giowth could be paiticulaily important in arid/semi arid and infertile areas However there is great uncertainty about whethei 01 not these mechanisms operate for prolonged periods in natural ecosystems For example there are no field data from whole ecosystem studies of forests that demonstrate a ' CO2 feitilization elfect It elevated CCb does stimulate the growth of woody vegetation, this could lead to long term net carbon storage tn terrcstial ecosystems

Ecosystem Structure and Climate Change

Because species respond ditfeiently to climatic change, some will increase in abundance while others will decrease Ecosystems will therefore change tn structure Ovet time some species may be displaced to higher latitudes or altitudes Rare species with small ranges may be prone to local 01 even global extinction

Warming rates ate piedicted to be laptd (0 VC per decade) and there is gieat uncertainty about how species will icspond to these rapid changes Ecosystems of latge stature such as ioiests may not be able to migrate fast enough to keep pace with climate

change In past times, species migrations were largely unaffected by human land use Barriers to migration now exist (e g , human settlements, highways, etc ) Therefore, inferences from previous migrations cannot be applied without caution to the present and future situations

Human Activities, Ecosystem Changes and the Climate System

Human activities such as deforestation in the tropics and forest harvest and regrowth in mid latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere are influencing the climate system by affecting greenhouse gas fluxes Deforestation in the tropics is releasing 1 6 ± 1 Pg C annually to the atmosphere

The net exchange of carbon between the land and the atmosphere due to forest harvest and iegrowth tn the mid latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere is uncertain These regrowing ioiests may be accumulating 1-2 Pg C annually One analysis suggests that an equivalent amount ol carbon is released back to the atmosphere thiough the burning and decay of previously harvested wood

The issue of carbon storage in the mid latitudes of the Noithein Hemisphere is iurther complicated by the eutrophication ol the region with nitrogen Nitrogen in agncultuial fertilizers and in acid tain may be promoting carbon storage at the rate ol 0 5	10

Pg C annually, but there is considerable uncertainly tn this estimate

Reforestation as a Means of Managing Atmospheric CO2

Reducing the atmospheric CO2 concentration through an afforestation program would require the planting of a vast aiea of forest Approximately 370 x 10^ ha of tempeiatc loiest would have to be planted tn order to accumulate 1 Pg C annually I Ins assumes a forest with an annual carbon accumulation rate of 2 7 t per hectare The carbon accumulation would continue for almost a century After that time the forest would be mature and would not sequester more carbon

Methane and Nitrous Oxide Fluxes

Microbial activity is the dominant source to the atmosphere of methane and nitrous oxide Warmet and wettei soil conditions may lead to increased fluxes of these gases to the atmosphere Changes tn land use and fertilizer and atmospheric inputs of nitrogen, also have the potential to affect methane and nittous oxide fluxes

Deforestation and Regional Hydrology

The conversion of large areas of tropical forest to grassland will likely change the hydrological regime of the region. Rainfall will be reduced and surface water flow will be affected.

Marine Ecosystems

Climate change will probably affect ocean circulation and mixing patterns. Circulation and mixing control nutrient availability to the oceans' microscopic plants (phytoplankton) and their access

to solar radiation required for photosynthesis. Since nutrients are an important controller of net primary production in marine environments, production will be changed to the degree that upper ocean physical processes change in response to climate change. Different nutrient and mixing regimes are characterized by different plankton communities, which have wide ranging efficiencies of processing carbon, with important implications for long term ocean storage of organic carbon.

10.0 Introduction

On the basis of current evidence from climate modelling studies it appears that the change in globally averaged surface temperature due to doubling CO2 probably lies in the range 1 5 to 4 5°C (Section 5) Temperature changes ol this magnitude in the Earth s history have been associated with shifts in the geographic distribution of terrestrial biota For example, the boreal forests of Canada extend well north of the current timber line during the Medieval Warm Epoch (800 to 1200 AD) a time when temperatures in that region were about 1°C waimei than todays At the same time, fanners in Scandinavia grew cereal crops as far north as 65° latitude (Lamb 1977) Evidence from the past suggests that the potential for ecosystem change in a warmer future is large (Warrick et al 1986a)

A shift in the geogiaphic distribution of teriesti lai biota is a long-term (decades to centuries) response to climate change Responses to a changing climate will also occur at other time-scales In the shoit term (minutes to ycais) likely ecosystem responses include changes in the iates of processes such as photosynthesis and decomposition and changes in the interactions between species such as those between plants and insect pests In the intermediate term (years to decades), these changes in processes and interactions will lead to changes in community stiucture For example, in a mixed foiest type in the mid-latitude region, where both deciduous and coniferous tiee species coexist, a warmer climate could lead to the loss of the conifers

Some climate-induced changes of ecosystem structuie and function are expected to feed back to the climate system For instance, the warming of high latitude wetlands will almost certainly increase the production of CH4 and its release to the atmosphere and this will accelerate wanning

10.1	Focus

In this section we consider two general issues the effects of global change on ecosystems and the effects of ecosystem changes on the climate system We center most of our discussion on process-level responses of ecosystems to global change To understand many ecosystem lcsponses to climate change, we consider them in the context of other components of global change such as increases in the atmospheric concentration of CCD We also consider the ecological consequences of tropical deforestation and the eutrophication of Northern Hemisphere areas with nitrogen in agriculture fertilizers and in acid precipitation as examples of ecosystem changes influencing climate systems While the primary focus ol this section is on terrestrial ecosystems we end the section with a brief discussion of climate change and maiinc ecosystems

10.2	Effects of Increased Atmospheric CO2 and Climate Change on Terrestrial Ecosystems

Increases in atmospheric CCD, warming and changes in precipitation patterns all have the potential to affect terrestrial ecosystems in a variety of ways Here we leview some of the major effects and identify some of the ways that these three factors interact to influence ecosystems

10.2.1	Plant and Ecosystem Responses to Elevated CO2 Current climate models estimate that even 11 man made emissions of CCD could be kept at present rates atmospheric CCD would increase to about 450 ppmv by the year 2050 and to about 520 ppmv by the year 2100 (Section 1) Regardless of how the climate changes over this period the Earth s biota will be living in a CCD-rich environment How will plants and ecosystems respond to elevated CCD7

10211 Plant 1 espouses	_

In this part of the report we will refer to two general groups of plants - C3 plants and C4 plants These plant groups differ in a number of ways including certain aspects of the biochemical pathways they use in the photosynthesis process Most of the Earth s plant biomass (about 95%) is accounted for by C3 species, but a number of plants important to humans, such as maize, aie C4 species

102 1 1 1 Cai bon budget Atmospheric CCD affects various components of a plant s carbon budget including photosynthesis respnation and biomass accumulation and allocation

Photosynthesis - It has been shown many times that a doubling of CCD in the atmosphere will cause a shoit-term (minutes to hours) increase in photosynthesis (Kimball 1983 Gillord 1988) In some plants the increase is leduced after longer-term (weeks to months) exposure (Tissue and Occhel 1987 Fetcher et al 1988 Sage et al 1990) This reduction may occur because other factois such as low nutrient availability eventually limit CCD uptake

Respiration - Two types of respiration are recognized in plants one known as photoiespiration is intimately associated with photosynthesis and the other daik respiration includes all plant respiration except photorespiration Photorespiration of C3 plants is greatly reduced at high CCD The pattern is not so clear for dark respiration The published data on dark respiration rate pei unit of diy weight or leaf area indicate increases in some cases (Occhel and Strain 1985) and decreases in others (Gifford et al 1985)

Biomass accumulation When grown at high CO2 levels undci favoiablc environmental conditions (e g facorable tempciature plentiful water and nutrients) C3 plants almost always show increases in biomass accumulation

The C4 plants are less responsive to high CO2 levels in terms ol biomass accumulation but nonetheless the response is generally positive For both C3 and C4 plants the response is very species dependent and closely linked to environmental conditions (Mooney et al 1990)

Allocation - Increases in CO? affect how plants allocate carbon among their various organs Many studies indicate that with increasing atmospheric CO2, plants allocate proportionally more carbon below ground than above ground, causing an increase in root to shoot ratios (Langaudene et al 1988, Curtis et al 1990) High CO2 can also increase the number of branches, tillers, flowers or fruits that a plant has (e g , Curtis et al 1989)

The ways in which other environmental factors interact with CO2 to determine carbon allocation in plants is largely unknown This is a serious gap in our knowledge and is a major stumbling block to the development of mechanistic, whole-plant models of carbon dynamics

Tissue quality - Plant tissue quality can change with exposure to high CO2 Changes in tissue quality include higher carbohydrate levels (Siomt et al 1981) and, at least in one instance, higher levels of soluble phenolics and structural compounds (Melillo 1983) Nutrient concen trations are also often decreased (Curtis et al 1990, see 10 2 1 13) These changes in tissue quality could have far-reaching consequences for herbivory host-pathogen relationships, and soil processes such as decomposition and nutrient cycling Much more work is needed in this area betore we can make generalizations about the linkages between elevated CO2, tissue chemistry and ecosystem elfccts

102 1 12 Interactions between caihon dioxide and tempei atm e Temperature and CO2 interact to affect photosynthesis and growth Although the reactions are species specific, the general response for C3 plants is that the optimum temperature increases for net photosynthesis Idso and colleagues (1987) have suggested that plant growth response to elevated CO2 seems to be greater at higher temperatures If, however, temperature becomes extremely high, enzyme degradation will limit both photosynthesis and growth Likewise, plants growing at low temperatures are not as responsive to elevated CO2 for physiological reasons that lead to a feedback inhibition of photosynthesis

102 1 I 3 Cai bon dioxide and emu onmental stiess Elevated CO2 can influence plant responses to limitations of water, light and nutrient availability and other environmental factors (Table 10 1)

Watci stress - Water use can be affected by high CO2 Short-term measurements show that inci cased CO2 1 educes water-loss (transpiration) rates per unit leaf area and incieases water use efficiency (WUE) which is the latio of

Table 10.1 Relatixe effects of mcieased CO2 on plant ip ow th and yield a tentatix e c ompilation1 (fi om Wai 1 ic k et al 1986b)

	C3	c4
Under non-stressed conditions	4-4-	0 to +
Under environmental stress:		

Water (deficiency)

	4-4-	4-
Light intensity (low)	4-	+
Temperature (high)	++	0 to +
Temperature (low)	+	9
Mineral nutrients	0 to +	0 to +
Nitrogen (deficiency)	+	4-
Phosphorous (deficiency)	O'7	O'7
Potassium (deficiency)	9	9
Sodium (excess)	9	4-

1 Sign of change relative to control CO2 under similar environmental constraints

++ strongly positive

+ positive

0 no effect

7 not known or uncertain

photosynthesis to transpiration (Farquhar and Sharkey 1982) Increased WUE could lead to increased biomass accumulation for plants growing in and environments

The net effect of high CO2 on total water use pei unit land area under field conditions is less certain This is because the increases in leaf area and toot extension observed in high-CO2 plants tend to increase total water use and may counteract the effect of low transpiration per unit leaf area Gifford (1988) has concluded that foi both physiological and meteorological reasons, high CO2 concentration might exert little or no effect on regional evapotranspnation, but this issue is far from resolved

Low light - Carbon dioxide enrichment can increase plant growth at low light intensity In fact, the relative enhancement of giowth at low light can even be greater than at high light (Gifford 1979) Foi some plants, however the relative enhancement of growth by high CO2 appears equal at low and high light (Siomt et al 1 C)82)

Nutrient stiess High CO2 can increase plant giowth in some situations of nutrient-stress A number of C3 plants giowing under mtiogen-deflcient conditions exhibited

increased growth when the CO2 concentration was doubled (Wong 1979, Sionit et al 1981, Goudnaan and de Ruiter 1983) In these instances there was an increase in the nitrogen use efficiency (NUE), that is, the ratio of carbon gain to nitrogen used was increased

102 1 1 4 Phenology and senescence Elevated CO2 has been shown to influence the phenology and senescence of plants Annual plants may develop more quickly under elevated CO2, reaching full leaf area, biomass, and flower and fruit production sooner than plants at ambient CO2 (Paez et al 1984) Early leaf and seed production could shift the population dynamics and competitive relationships of plants growing under field conditions

There is also evidence of delayed senescence of some species under elevated CO2 (Hardy and Havelka 1975, Mooneyetai 1990) Delayed leaf senescence could extend the growing season and this could lead to increased biomass accumulation (Mooney et al 1990) In ecosystems with cold climates, however, the growing season could also expose plants to frost damage (Oechel and Strain 1985)

102 1 2 Community and ecosystem 1 espouses to elesated cat bon dioxide

10	2 1 2 1 Plant plant inteiactions We can expect changes in the interactions of C3 plants with elevated CO2 As we noted earlier (see 10 2 1 1 1) the responses of C3 plants to increased CO2 are species dependent

Some ecosystems such as temperate zone grasslands can contain a mixture of C3 and C4 plants Elevated CCD could affect the competition between them Based on what we know about the biochemistry and physiology of C3 and C4 species, we would expect that as the CCD concentration increases, the C3 plants should do progressively better than the C4 plants, unless there is water stress A numbei ol studies have shown just these results For example Bazzaz and Carlson (1984) studied the competition between C3 and C4 herbaceous plants giown under two moistuic regimes and three levels of CCD (300. 600 and 1200 ppm) The C3 species grew progressively more rapidly (was a better competitor) than the C4 species as the CCD and moisture levels increased

102 1 2 2 Intel actions between plants and animals The effects of increased CCD on plant-animal interactions have received relatively little attention Some work has been done on herbivory and the conclusion is that herbivory may be indirectly aflected by high CO2 concentrations Several repoits (Overdieck et al 1984 Lincoln et al 1984 1986 Lincoln and Couvet 1989 Fa|ci ct al 1989) have indicated that latcs of heibivory incicasc on plant tissues giown at high CCD These increases in hcibivor) appear to be related to changes in the tissue quality of plants exposed to elevated CCD (see 10 2 1 1 1) The mcicased heibivory

could affect plant growth as well as feed back to ecosystem-level phenomena like nutrient cycling Increased herbivory would be expected to accelerate nutrient cycling

Linkages between the effects of elevated CO2 on plant phenology and herbivory have been suggested (Oechel and Strain 1985), but to our knowledge no research has been carried out on this topic One argument is that changes in the timing of herbivore feeding relative to plant phenology could affect productivity and competitive ability of the plants concerned

10 2 123 Interaction between plants and nuciobes Elevated atmospheric CO2 and climate change will probably have major effects on microbial symbionts of plants such as mtrogen-fixing bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi

Symbiotic nitrogen fixing organisms have laige requirements for energy provided as plant photosynthate These organisms are primarily responsible for giving plants access to the large reservoir of nitrogen in the atmosphere by converting that gaseous nitrogen into organic nitrogen For many ecosystems, high rates of productivity are linked to nitrogen fixation Numerous experiments have shown that climatic variables and CO2 concentration are important controllers of the relationship between plants and symbiotic nitrogen fixers For example, a field experiment by Hardy and Havelka (1975) showed that over a nme-week period, plants grown with supplemental CCD exhibited a five-fold increase in nitrogen fixation rate over untreated controls

Mycorrhizae are symbiotic associations between the host-plant root and a mycorrhizal fungus As with symbiotic nitrogen fixers, the mycorrhizal fungi depend on plants for a supply of reduced carbon Thus climate and CO2 changes that affect a plant s ability to fix atmospheric CO2 have the potential to affect mycorrhizal functioning Mycorrhizae may affect plant nutrition especially phosphorus nutrition and plant water relations Luxmoore and co-workers (Luxmoore et al 1986, Norby et al 1986 O Neill et al 1987) have shown that mycorrhizal infection is enhanced by elevated CCD , and the increased infection resulted in increased plant growth on nutrient-poor soils

10 2 1 2 4 Decomposition Free-living soil microorganisms are responsible for organic matter decay Decay rate is a function of the chemical quality ol the organic matter and environmental factors such as temperatuie and moisture (see 10 2 2 2 3) Earlier we noted that plants giown in elevated CCD have altered tissue chcmistiy such as highci carbon to nitrogen ratios These changes 111 tissue chemistry could slow decomposition and possibly lead to plant nutrient stress

10 2 1 2 5 Whole-ecosystem exposiiie to elexated caibon dioxide Many of the direct effects of elevated CCD on plant growth have been observed in short term studies in the laboratory Serious questions have been raised about whether or not these phenomena actually occui in the field and if they do, whether they are long-teim or only tiansient Some answers to these questions may be gamed from a review of two recent experiments on intact ecosystems -one a tussock tundra ecosystem in Alaska and the other a mid-latitude salt-marsh ecosystem in Maryland These are the only whole-ecosystem experiments we know of in which the entire system has been subjected to doubled CCD concentrations for more than one growing season Both experiments have been run for thiee years

At the tundra site, CO2 and temperature were controlled in greenhouses placed over intact field plots (Oechel and Riechers 1987, Tissue and Oechel 1987) Experimental treatments included ambient CO2 and temperature con ditions, elevated CO2 (510 and 680 ppmv) and ambient temperature, and elevated CO2 and temperature (680 ppmv CO2, +4°C temperature above ambient)

At the salt-marsh site CO2 was controlled through the use of open top chambers set over intact field plots (Drake et al 1989) The experimental treatments included ambient CO2 and temperature, and elevated CO2 (ambient plus 340 ppm) and ambient temperature

The tundra ecosystem is floristically diverse but is dominated by a sedge, while the marsh system is comprised largely of pure patches of two higher plants, a sedge and a grass The tundra and salt marsh sedges aie C3 plants and the salt marsh grass is a C4 plant The plant and ecosystem responses of these two systems (Table 10 2) generally follow predictions based on the interactions of CCD and the other environmental factors discussed earlier

Significant ecosystem-level cltccts were noted in both the tundra and the salt marsh For the tundra plots exposed to elevated CCD, there was a complete homeostatic adjustment of whole ecosystem carbon flux within three years, with the result being no change in net carbon storage in CCD-treated plots relative to controls However, the combination of elevated CCD and temperature rise resulted in an increase in net carbon storage that lasted lor the three years of observations (Oechel and Riecheis 1986, 1987)

The CO2 treatment in pure stands of the C3 marsh plant resulted in increased net carbon storage for the whole system In the puie stands of C4 glass, net carbon storage for the whole system was not increased

One of the most important points that can be made about the comparison ol the responses ol the two ecosystems to elevated CO2 is that the intciactions among temperature, CO2 and nutrient availability aie key controlling factors Temperature affects both plant photosynthetic response to elevated CO2 and nutrient availability through organic matter decomposition (see 10 2 2 2 3) Both temperature

and nutrient availability exert control on the growth of plant organs where fixed caibon can be stored In cold, low nutrient environments, the growth of storage organs is slow and this can lead to an 'end product' inhibition of photosynthesis II temperature is not limiting, but nutrients are, the increased allocation of fixed carbon to roots could lesult in more of the soil volume being "mined" to meet plant nutrient demand, thereby allowing the plant to utilize the CO2

Have we correctly interpreted the interactions and do they operate in other tei restrial ecosystems9 We do not know the answers to these questions There have been no long-term studies of the responses of most of the world's ecosystems to elevated CO2 or climate change For example, we currently have no information about many of the responses of forests and other woody ecosystems to elevated CCD Some scientists have argued that limitations of water, nutrients and light, will prevent these ecosystems, especially unmanaged foresets, from showing significant responses to elevated levels of atmospheric CO2 (e g , Kramer, 1981) The responses of forests to increased CO2 are very uncertain A high research priority for the near future has to be a series of whole ecosystem manipulations, including forest manipulations, in which key controlling factors such as CCD, temperature, moisture and nutrient availability aie varied

10 2 13 Summa/ y

Increased atmospheric CO2 has the potential to alter ecosystem metabolism Net primary production could be enhanced by increased CCD in a variety of ways including the following stimulation ol photosynthesis, depression of respiration, relief of water and low light stresses, relief of nutrient stress by several mechanisms (greater nutrient use efficiency, increased nutrient uptake through root-microbial associations increased symbiotic nitrogen fixation), and delay of senescence that prolongs the growing season

Elevated CCD could also lead to net carbon storage, especially if the growth of woody vegetation is stimulated and there is not an equal stimulation of decomposition by some other factor such as warming At this time we have no evidence that elevated CCD has increased net carbon storage in natural ecosystems dominated by woody vegetation

Increased CO2 could also change species composition by affecting plant reproductive processes, competition, plant-animal interactions, and plant-microbe interactions

Table 10.2 Effects of doubling CO2 on several plant and ecosystem properties and processes. In the arctic all species are Cj. Saltmarsh communities are mono-specific stands of the sedge Scirpas olneyi (Cff) and the grass Spartina patens (C4}. The symbols indicate the response to elevated compared to normal ambient CO2 as an increase (+), decrease (-), no change (0), or no data as a blank.

ARCTIC	SALTMARSH
	C3	C4

I PLANT EFFECTS

Carbon exchange			
Photosynthesis	0	+	0
Acclimation of photosynthesis	+	0	0
Plant respiration	0	-	-
Decomposition of dead shoots		-	-
Growth			
Shoot expansive growth	0	0	0
Root biomass	-/o	+	0
Number of shoots	+	+	0
Size of shoots	0	0	0
Root/shoot ratio	-/o	+	0
Tissue Composition			
N tissue concentration	-	-	0
Carbon/nitrogen	+	+	0
Starch content	+		
Tissue density/specific wt.	+	0	0
Salt content		-	

D Development/reproduction

Senescence

Tillering

Number of flowers

Number of seeds/stem

Sexual/asexual reproduction

E Water Use

Transpiration

Water use efficiency

Leaf tempertaure

Leaf water potential

-	-	0
+	+	0
-	0	0
-	0	0
0		
0	+	+
0	+	+
	+	+

II	ECOSYSTEM EFFECTS

Evapotranspiration	0	-	-
Net carbon storage	+/0	+	0
Acclimation of NCE to CO2	+	0	0
Net ecosystem respiration Species		-	-
composition	+	+	0
Water use	0	-	-
Nitrogen content of canopy	-	0	0
Soil enzyme activity	+/-		
Soil solution nitrogen	-/o		

NCE = Net Carbon Exchange. (Moungetal., 1990)

10.2.2	Plant and Ecosystem Responses to Changes in

Temperature and Moisture

Temperature and moisture are considered major controllers of plant and ecosystem processes. They exert a strong influence on birth, growth and death rates of plants. They also act as primary controllers of the biogeochemistry of ecosystems. In this section we review some of the aspects of these controls.

J0.2.2.1 Plant responses to changes in temperature and moisture

10.2.2.1.1	Carbon budget: Temperature and moisture are important controllers of the carbon budgets of plants. These environmental factors directly influence basic processes such as photosynthesis and respiration.

Temperature - Photosynthesis and plant respiration respond differently to temperature. For example, gross photosynthesis of many mid-latitude plants ceases at temperatures just below 0°C (minimum) and well above 40°C (maximum), with optimum rates in the range of 20-35°C (Figure lO.l.b). Above 0°C the response of photosynthesis to temperature is initially rapid, but slows in the optimum range. In contrast, plant respiration rate tends to be slow below 20°C, but at higher temperatures it accelerates rapidly up to the temperature where the rate of respiration equals the rate of gross photosynthesis, and there can be no net assimilation of carbon (Figure 10.1 .b). The response of net photosynthesis is broadly similar to that of overall growth (Figures 10.1.a and lO.l.b). These differences in the responses of photosynthesis and

Figure 10.1: Schematic representation of plant responses to temperature. Panel (a) is the general response of plant growth, and panel (b) is the general response of photosythesis and respiration. Tmjn = a minimum temperature, Topt = optimum temperature range, and Tmax - a maximum temperature. (From Fitter and Hay, 1981).

respiration to temperature increases have been used to support the argument that global warming may result in a reduction in net carbon uptake by plants (Woodwell, 1987).

It must be noted that some plants do appear to have the ability to adjust to temperature changes. Cases have been documented where respiratory response to temperature is adjusted to stay within a limited range of rates in spite of the prevailing temperature (e.g., McNulty and Cummins, 1987).

Moisture - Water stress can decrease photosynthesis in a wide range of plants (e.g., Hsaio, 1973). As we discussed earlier (10.2.1.4), water stress can be alleviated, at least in the short term, when plants are exposed to increased atmospheric CC>2.

The effects of water stress on respiration are complex. A reduction in moisture supply will, in many cases, reduce plant growth and so reduce respiration associated with growth (Hanson and Hitz, 1982). If water stress is severe it will cause cellular damage and this may lead to increased rates of protein turnover with an associated increase in respiration.

10.2.2.1.2	Phenology and senescence: As well as influencing the rate of plant growth and metabolism, temperature and moisture can influence the timing of development and senescence. For example, the annual leaf canopy development and abscission in autumn-deciduous trees and shrubs are partially under temperature control. In the drier tropical ecosystems, moisture often functions as the primary controller of canopy development and leaf senescence (Long, 1990). Thus, depending on the ecosystem, either temperature or moisture can function as a primary determinant of the length of the growing season.

Canopy development in northern ecosystems often depends on winter temperatures. In the well documented case of the spruce^Picea sitchensis (Cannell and Smith, 1986), bud-burst is only triggered after a winter period providing 140 days with a temperature of less than 5°C, followed by a spring period of warmer weather. If the winter temperatures increase, as predicted, so that there is a period shorter than 140 days when temperatures are less than 5°C, then bud-burst may be delayed or even fail to occur. This is the type of climate effect that will result in the migration of plant species to higher latitudes or higher elevations (see 10.2.2.3).

Not all species will respond to climate changes by migrating to higher latitudes or higher elevations. Field experiments have shown that species are able to evolve new phenological characteristics in a new climate. This has been observed to occur within 8 years of transplanting populations to a new climate (Woodward, 1990). The rapidity of this response was observed in an herbaceous perennial, which showed marked temporal changes in seed germination and dormancy in the new environment. The

universality of this response is unknown but it could prove to be a powerful agent for disrupting community synchrony, for initiating structural change and lor enhancing the capacity of species to migrate

10 2 2 2 Community and ec osystem i espouses

10 2 2 2 1 Plant community composition Changes in climate will likely alter differentially the regeneration success, growth and mortality rates of plants The resulting changes in competitiveness of species or species groups will affect community composition Where species occur at their distributional limits, in transition zones, small changes in climate are likely to promote disproportionately large responses in the plant species Changes in community structure will, therefore be identified sooner in transitional zones between vegetation types than elsewhere

102 2 2 2 Intel actions between plants and animals Of crucial importance in plant community functioning is the synchronous operation of the life cycles of interacting plants, animals and soil organisms Complex synchronies are found in communities in which the life cycles of plants and pollinating and seed-dispersing animals must be closely linked Changes in climate could disrupt these synchronies

Climate-related stresses such as drought stress, can make plants susceptible to insect attack As an example, oak wilt disease in the USSR appears to be dependent on the decreased ability of the trees to resist leaf-eating insects during drought (Israel et al, 1983)

Warming may expand the overwintering ranges of some plant pests and this could prove a serious problem for agroecosystems For example, in the United States the potato leafhopper, a serious pest on soybeans and other crops, currently overwinters only in a narrow band along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico Warmer winter temperatures could cause a doubling or a tripling of its overwintering range This would increase invasion populations and lead to greater insect density and increased plant damage (Smith and Tirpak, 1989)

10 2 2 2 3 Decomposition Climate is an important controller of the decomposition ol both surface litter and organic matter dispersed through the soil profile The chemical composition of the decomposing material also influences decay rate

Surface litter - The decomposition of surface litter is very clearly related to climatic factors, with rates generally increasing with increasing temperature and precipitation in well-drained sites In pooily diaincd sites, excessive moisture (waterlogging) can slow decay rates Climatic control is most often quantified by a lelationship with actual evapotranspiration (AET)

It has been known lor some time that litters from different plant species decay at different rates under similar conditions (Minderman, 1968) This has been linked to differences in the quality ol carbon Litters with high lignin concentrations will decay more slowly than those with lower concentrations The ratio of lignin to nitrogen has proven a good predictor of litter decay rate in temperate and boreal ecosystems (Melillo et al , 1982)

A number of attempts have been made to integrate the climate and chemical quality controls of litter decay These models generally indicate that when AET is low the decomposition rates do not vary much with lignin concentrations, but as AET increases resource quality accounts for more of the variation in decomposition iates (Meentemcyer, 1978, 1984, Pastor and Post, 1986)

Soil organic matter - Tempeiatuie, moisture and soil texture are important controlleis of soil organic matter decomposition These factors assume more or less importance depending on the ecosystem In tundra ecosystems soil respiration can be limited by an excess of moisture (waterlogging) as well as by low temperatuies

Soil respiration in the well drained forests of the boreal and temperate zones are most often temperature limited (Van Cleve and Sprague 1971, Bunnell et al 1977) Soil respiration in these systems is rarely limited by moisture deficit (Anderson, 1973 Schlesinger, 1977, Moore 1984) In very dry sub tropical forests, lack of moisture can limit decay (Carlyle and U Ba, 1988)

Overall, litter decomposition and SOM accumulation in climax grasslands follow predictable climate and soil texture-related patterns (Brady 1974) which arc amenable to the development ol simulation models of carbon dynamics (Hunt, 1977, McGill et al , 1981 Van Veen and Paul, 1981 Parton et al 1987) In dry grassland sites soil respiration is primarily a lunction of soil moisture (Hunt 1977, Warembourg and Paul 1977 Orchaid and Cook 1983) although computer model simulations of the response of semi-arid soils ol North America to wanning suggest that higher soil tempeiatures will result in increased carbon losses (Schimel private communication) In mesic grasslands as in forests temperatuie is the mam determinant of carbon mineralization rates foi the soil system Fine textured soils, those rich in clays are thought to render soil organic matter more stable thiough the mechanism of physical piotcction than arc the coarse textured sandy soils

There is concern that global warming will accelerate the decomposition of surface litter and soil organic matter especially at high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere In the Arctic tundra, there are about 160 Pg carbon stored in the soil (Schlesingei, 1984) Most of it is lio/en in permafrost with only 20-40cm thawing in the summer Even for the thawed material the cold and in some cases wet conditions preclude lapid decomposition But what

will happen if a CO2 doubling is accompanied by a 4 8°C temperature increase9

The experiments of Billings and his colleagues (1982. 1983 1984) suggest that wet sedge tundra will become a net source of carbon to the atmosphere, at least tor a short time, if climate changes such that air temperature is increased and there is greater soil drainage Billings argued that warmer temperatures and a lowered water table would result in greatly increased rates ol soil respnation Using Billing's data, Lashof (1989) calculated that a 4°C temperature rise would increase the net annual flux of carbon lrom the tundra to the atmosphere by 1 Pg

The consequences of soil wanning in northern forests are cleai from an experiment conducted on a boreal forest in Alaska Experimental heating of the surface soil, to 9°C above ambient temperature for three summers was carried out in black spruce forest (Van Cleve et al 1983) For the entire period there was a 20% reduction in the amount of organic carbon in the surface soil of the heated site as compared to no reduction in an adjacent control site The mci eased decay of the soil organic matter lesulted in an increase in nutrients available to plants As a result of the moic favourable temperature and nutrient regimes, foliage showed increased photosynthetic rates and significantly higher concentrations of nitrogen, phosphorus and other nutrients important to plant growth

102 2 2 4 Models of ecosystem /espouse to climate chani’e A family of population based forest growth models (e g , JABOWA, FORET LINKAGES) has been used to consider the effects of climate change on forest composition, carbon storage capacity and geographic distiibution For example Pastor and Post (1988) ran a population-based forest growth model (LINKAGES) for seveial sites including a spiucc-noithern hardwood site in northeastern Minnesota Forest growth was simulated on two soil types found in this iegion one with low waterholding capacity and the othei with high water-holding capacity The simulations weie initiated from bare plots with the seeds of trees commonly found in the aiea For 200 years the sites weie allowed to follow the forest dynamics appropnate to the cunent climate The climate conditions were then changed linearly to reach a 2x00? climate over the next 100 ycais and then remained constant the Imai 200 years of the simulation

On the soil with high watei-holding capacity the spiuce-norlhcin haidwood lorcst was replaced by a more pioductivc northern hardwood foiest (Figure 10 2) The aboveground carbon mass in the mature post-climatc-change iotest was about 50% gicatcr than in the pie climate-change foiest The noithein hardwood foiest was moic pioductivc lor two icasons Fust in the model noithein haidwoods have a faslci giowth late and can attain a gicatci biomass than the spiucc Second the

c/> cn <5

0

1750

500

400

100

CLAYS	
(a)	OTHER (BASSWOOD)
OTHER	Zf	BIRCH
_ PINE	\	MAPLE
J ASPEN \			SPRUCE  s 1 1

2050’

1950

PRESENT CLIMATE | WARMING I GREENHOUSE CLIMATE’

500

g 400 <1

2 o

“ -300

o o C 2 cn =□ 2 g ~200 o

LU >

§ 100

SANDS

0

1750	1950	2050’

PRESENT CLIMATE WARMING GREENHOUSE CLIMATE’

Figure 10.2: Predictions of biomass and species composition of Minnesota forests under climatic conditions predicted with CCb doubling The predictions are based on a forest growth model (LINKAGES) Climate inputs were the same for the two runs but panel (a) shows simulated lorest growth on a soil with high water holding capacity, and panel (b) shows simulated forest growth on a soil with low water holding capacity (After Pastor and Post 1988)

warmer climate, as well as the relatively easy-to-decompose litter of the hardwoods, increases mtiogen availability and this enhancement amplifies the effect of warming on productivity

On the soil with the low water-holding capacity, the spruce-northern hardwood forest was replaced by a stunted pine-oak forest of much lower carbon storage capacity At maturity, the oak-pine forest contained only 25% of carbon contained in the original spruce-northern hardwood forest

In this example, temperature, plant-soil water relations, and mtiogen cycling all inter acted to al feet ecosystem structure and function Changes in climate resulted in changes in foiest composition and depending on soil water iclations eithci an mcicasc 01 a dcciease in ecosystem caibon stoiage capacity

Solomon (1986) used anothci population-based forest growth model (FORENA) lor 21 locations in eastern Noith America with 72 species of trees available as seeds at all times Initial soil conditions were the same at all sites The simulations were all initiated from a bare plot and were allowed to follow the forest dynamics appropriate to the modem climate with undisturbed conditions lor 400 years After year 400 the climatic conditions were changed linearly to reach the 2xCC>2 climate in year 500 (see Solomon, 1986 for details)

At the end of 400 years the forests on the 21 sites had reached structural maturity and most contained the appropriate species mixes as judged by comparing them to what actually grows at the sites The major eflects of the changes in climate that resulted from a doubling of atmospheric CO2 were as follows

A slower growth of most deciduous tree species throughout much of their geographical range,

A dieback of the dominant trees, particularly in the transition between boreal/deciduous forests,

A reduction of carbon storage in the vegetaion in the southern two-thirds of the region and a gain in the far north,

An invasion of the southern boreal forest by temperate deciduous trees that was delayed by the presence of the boreal species

A shift in the general pattern of foiest vegetation similar to the pattern obtained from the Holdndge map experiments (see 10 2 2 3 1)

The overall reduction in carbon stocks in the vegetation of forests of the eastern North America was estimated to be 10% (Figure 10 3) It the results arc generalized to all temperate forests the annual flux Irom these systems to the atmosphere would be between 0 1 and 0 2 Pg C (Lashof 1989)

Solomon (1986) discussed the possible eflects of several impoitant ecological piocesses that wcic not included in the model For example insects and other pathogens as well as air pollutants could enhance the moitality simulated by the models Also plant migiation (and associated lag effects) could have a negative influence on foiest productivity

These forest growth models are useful tools for making piehmmary evaluations of forest ecosystem responses to climate change They do have a number of limitations and these have been lcviewcd iccently (Smith and Tirpak, 1989) For example majoi uncertainties exist legarding the kinds and rates of response of individual tree species to changes in the environment including the CCb increases Efforts aie cuirently undci way to impiove the physio logical and soil piocess components of these models

Climate change may lead to an inciease in the frequency of extreme weathei events such as tiopical stoirns Duel

2xCO2-fxCO2 BIOMASS

NET CHANGE=-11 t/ho

Figure 10.3: Caibon storage dynamics (in megagrams per hectare) simulated at 21 sites in eastern North America Map shows diffeiences above contemporary climate and 2xCCb climate Only carbon in above ground biomass is represented (Fiom Solomon 1986)

conditions in some regions may lead to increased fire frequency Large disturbances such as seveie storms and large fires can destroy vegetation, increase susceptibility of sites to erosion change nutrient cycling rates and dramatically alter animal habitat The effects of these large-scale disturbances are currently not consideied by these lorest growth models

10 2 2 3 Lai scale miipation of biota

One of the major consequences of climate change could be the migration of biota across the landscape The migrations could have many effects including the release of laigc amounts of carbon to the atmosphere from dying and decaying forests The releases could be large enough to further increase warming (Woodwell, 1987, Lashof, 1989) Both modelling studies and palaeoecological studies have been used to examine the relationships between climate change and forest migration

10 2 2 3 1 Simulation of global scale /espouse iismi’ i ei’etation-c Innate i elationsliips A veiy general approach to examining the possible responses of the world s ecosystem types to climate change is to use hypothetical relationships between climate and vegetation derived in present-day conditions, and to apply these to scenarios of changed climate Emanuel et al (1985a,b) employed a Iifezone classification of Holdridge (1947, 1964) This system hypothesizes zonation of vegetation across gradients of average total annual precipitation, the ratio of potential evapotranspiration to precipitation and mean annual biotemperature (average annual temperature computed by setting all values below 0°C to zero) Using the Holdridge system, Emanuel and his co-workers (1985a,b) predicted a large shrinkage of the boreal forest

(by 37%) and tundra (by 32%) and expansion of grassland lifezones under warmer climates due to a CO2 doubling Because the temperature changes in the climate-change scenario used by Emanuel and his colleagues were small toward the equator, there were smaller changes in the tropical life zones In this modelling exercise, precipitation was maintained at current levels for all areas

There are several uncertainties attached to this type of assessment (Emanuel et al, 1985a), notably the selection of climate scenarios and low iesolution of the data grid (0 5° x 0 5°) In addition, the response of ecosystems to factors such as CCb and the rate of climate change is not considered

10 2 2 3 2 Palaeo ecoloi>ical evidence The IPCC projections of climate change indicate a rapid rise in global temperature with an increase of about 0 3°C per decade over the next century (Section 5) Rapid increase in temperature may create problems for large stature ecosystems such as forests

The significance of projected rates of temperature change becomes clear when the consequent geographic shifts in isotherms are considered For example, in midcontinental North America, each degree (°C) change in temperature corresponds to a distance of 100-125 km If similar temperature-distance relationships are assumed in

Figure 10.4: Present and future range of eastern hemlock (Tsm>a canadensis) under two climate scenarios predicted by (a) Hansen et al 1983 and (b) Manabe and Wetherald, 1987 Light diagonal shading is the present range, and dark diagonal shading the potential range with CCb doubling Cross hatched area of overlap is where the trees are likely to be found 100 years from now (Davis, 1988)

the future, a 3°C rise in temperature would lead to a 300 to 375 km northward displacement in isotherms during the next century

Based on the fossil pollen record, we know that the rate of movement of forest trees during the Holocene was generally 25 and 40 km per century (Davis, 1981, Huntley and Birks, 1983), with the fastest rate 200 km per century (Ritchie and MacDonald, 1986) With these rates of movement, most tree species would not be able to change their geographical distribution as fast as the projected shifts in suitable climate Zaluski and Davis (unpublished data cited in Davis, 1988) provide an example based on the past rates of spread of eastern hemlock (Tsu^a canadensis) Under two scenarios lor future climate, this species would not be able to migrate fast enough to occupy much of its potential range 100 years from now (Figure 10 4)

Prehistorical species migrations were largely unaffected by human land use In contrast, modern species migrations may be severely restricted by land use, for example the progression of the altitudinal treelme with global warming may be prevented by stock grazing Also, because suitable habitats for many rare species chaiactenstic of areas of low productivity are infrequent and fragmentary, being surrounded by very pioductive agricultural land it is unlikely that these species will spread naturally even though climate change will increase then vigour and reproductive capacity On the other hand, the migration of weedy species may be enhanced by land-use change, foi example along comdors of dispeisal formed by loads, railways, etc and in open ground created by various forms of human disturbance

Very little is known about migration rates under present or likely future climates Models of migrations of invasive species based on diffusion (Williamson, 1989) or epidemic theory (Carter and Prince 1981) suggest that the outcome of invasions is often unexpected and accuiate prediction has rarely ever been achieved The relationship between species migrations and climate is not simple and geographical barrieis to dispersal may be locally important

Quaternary pollen lecoids also show that plant communities continuously change ovei time Communities disassemble and new ones arise presumably because species respond to climatic vauations accoiding to unique sets of physiological and ecological icquiiemcnts (Graham. 1986) The resulting new combinations of vegetation, climate and soils can change the spatial patteins of such fundamental processes as primaiy production (Pastoi and Post, 1988) More subtle but still important telationships such as those evolved between host and pathogen may be disrupted by the stress of new conditions resulting in increased frequency of epidemics (Leonaid and Fiy 1986)

Past changes in plant associations and abundances have been so marked that some types of ecosystems have also been transient Foi example 20 000 30 000 yeais ago

when the Earth's climate was about 5°C colder than present large parts of North America, Europe and Asia were covered by herbaceous vegetation that did not resemble modern tundra, grassland or steppe Thus a plant community that was dominant in the Northern Hemisphere for 10,000 years does not exist today Some well known modern ecosystems have had much shorter existences As an example, old-growth Douglas-fir (Pseudotsiii’a menziesn) forests of the Pacific Northwest, renowned lor their long-lived, massive trees and huge ecosystem carbon storage, are first recognized in the fossil record about 6000 years ago - representing only 5 to 10 generations oi the dominant tree species (Brubaker, personal communication)

Thus the dynamic record of the Earth s vegetation clearly demonstrates that ecosystems as well as communities may be short lived in the face of changing climate Ecosystems represent a set of processes linking biota and their geochemical environment in a particular climate Because natural variations in the Earth's climate have followed a relatively unique path dictated by changes in large-scale climatic controls, a variety of ecosystems come and go over time To the extent that human influences will cause unique future climates, we should expect fundamental changes in current ecosystems

10224 Summaiy

Both photosynthesis and plant and microbial respiration tend to increase with increasing temperatures, but at higher temperatuies respiration is often the more sensitive process (see 10 2 2 11) As a consequence, global warming may result in a period of net release of carbon from the land to the atmosphere (Woodwell, 1987) The magnitude of the release would depend on the magnitude and the seasonality of the temperature change and the responses of the vanous piocesses to that change One estimate is that the annual carbon flux fiom the boreal zone associated with a 4°C global temperatuie change would be in the range of 0 5 2 0 PgC(Lashof 1989)

Besides being dependent on temperature photosynthesis and plant and soil respiration can be influenced by soil watei Incieased water availability will tend to stimulate plant growth in dry ecosystems and to increase carbon storage in cold and wet ecosystems like lowland tundra A number of recent modelling studies have predicted that water stress will be a primary cause of forest death in the southern and central regions of North America as climate changes (eg Solomon 1986, Smith and Tirpak 1989) Forest death has the potential for releasing large stores of carbon to the atmosphere

A major consequence of climate change could be the migration of biota across the landscape Communities will not migrate as units Individual species will migiatc at different rates depending upon a variety of species specific

Table 10.3 Aiea co\eiat>e plant caibon and net piimaix pioduction foi ma/oi teiiestnal ecosystems according to Whittakei and Likens (1975) (2) At/as et al (1979) (S)Olsonetal (1983) The amount of caibon in sod is also shown following the classifications h\ (2) Atjas et al (1979) and accoidinq to (4) Scldesint>ei (1977) based on the classification by Whittakei and Likens (1975) Fi om Bohn 1986

Area	Plant carbon	Primary Production	Detritus, soil

1()12	PgC	PgCyr’l	PgC

	d/4)	(2)	(3)	(1)	(2)	(3)	(1)	(2)	(3)	(2)	(4)
(1) Tropical rain forest	17 0	10 3	120	344	193	164	168	105	93	82	
(2) Tropical seasonal forest	7 5	45	60	117	51	38	54	32	33	41	288
(3) Temperate forest	120	70	82	174	88	65	67	46	49	72	161
(4) Boreal forest	120	95	11 7	108	96	127	43	36	57	135	247
(5) Woodland, shrubland	85	45	12 8	23	24	57	27	22	46	72	59
interupted woods											
(6)Savannah	150	22 5	24 6	27	66	49	6 1	177	107	264	63
(7) Temperate grassland	90	125	67	6	9	11	24	44	26	295	170
(8) Tundra, alpine	80	95	136	2	6	13	05	09	1 8	121	163
(9) Desert semidesert	180	21 0	130	6	7	5	07	1 3	09	168	104
(10) Extreme desert	24 0	24 5	20 4	0	1	0	00	0 1	05	23	4
(11) Cultivated land	140	160	159	6	3	22	4 1	68	12 1	128	111
(12) Swamps, marshes and	20	20	25	14	12	7	27	3 3	36	225	145
coastal land											
(13) Bogs and peatland		1 5	04		3	1		07	02		
(14) Lakes and streams	20	20	32	0	0	1	04	04	04	0	0
(15) Human areas		20			1			02		10	
TOTAL	149 0	149 3	151 1	827	560	560	52 8	59 9	60 6	1636	1515

characteristics as well as environmental factors such as natural and human-caused barriers to dispersal Predictions of migration rates are very uncertain It is possible that many tree species will not be able to change their geographical distribution as fast as the projected shifts in suitable climate and extinctions may occur

10.3	The Effects of Terrestrial Ecosystem Changes on the Climate System

In this part of the report we consider how a variety of changes in terrestrial ecosystems can affect the climate system We begin by considering the types of ecosystem changes that will affect net carbon stoiage in ecosystems

10 3.1 Carbon Cycling in Terrestrial Ecosystems

Terrestrial ecosystems contain about 2000 Pg of carbon (Table 10 3) almost three times the amount held in the atmospheic Each year about 5% of the tci restrial carbon stock is exchanged with the atmosphere Plants take up about 100 Pg C lrom the atmospheie through the process ol

photosynthesis and release 40 Pg C through respiration The difference between total photosynthesis and plant respiration, 60 Pg C, is called net primary production (NPP) At the global scale tropical rain forest ecosystems are the most productive and desert ecosystems are the least productive (Table 10 3)

In an unperturbed world, NPP is approximately balanced by the release of carbon from soils to the atmosphere through microbial respiration This carbon balance can be changed considerably by direct human impact (landuse changes, particularly deforestation) and by other changes in the environment such as the composition of the atmosphere as well as by changes in climate as discussed earlier (10 2 2 4)

10 3 I 1 Defoiestation in theTiopics

The current IPCC estimate for the annual net release of carbon from the land to the atmospheic due to deforestation and related land use in the tropics is 1 6 ± 1 0 Pg (Section 1) The large uncertainty associated with this number is ielated to the fact that we have poor knowledge of the rate

of deforestation, of the carbon stocks of the forests being cleared, and of the dynamics of carbon loss through soil decay processes following clearing (Houghton, 1990)

10 3 1 2 Foiest leqiovith in the mid latitudes of the Noi thei n Hemisphei e

Several analyses suggest that the forest harvest and regrowth cycle is such that at this time the regrowing forests in the mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere are accumulating carbon at the rate of 1-2 Pg annually (Armentano and Ralston, 1980, Johnson and Sharpe, 1983, Melillo et al, 1988) What is not clear at the present time is the rate of oxidation of the cut wood One analysis (Melillo et al, 1988) suggests that the carbon in the cut wood is being returned to the atmosphere through decay and burning at about the rate that the regrowing lorests are accumulating carbon This subject deserves further attention especially in light of the recent modelling study of the global carbon cycle that suggests that mid-latitude ecosystems of the Northern Hemisphere arc accumulating carbon at the rate of 2 0 to 3 4 Pg C annually (Tans et al 1990)

10 3 1 3 Euti ophication and toufication m the midlatitudes of the Noi thei n Henn sphei e

The issue of carbon storage in the mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere is further complicated by the increased availability of nutrients such as nitrogen from agricultural fertilizers and from combustion of fossil fuel This increased nitrogen availability may result in net carbon storage in plants and soils (Melillo and Gosz 1983 Peterson and Melillo 1985) In the mid to late 1980 s between 70 and 75 Tg N per year have been applied to agricultural fields mostly in the mid-latitudes ol the Northern Hemisphere (Eichnei 1990) In addition about 18 Tg N have been deposited each year on the lorests ol this region in acid precipitation (Melillo et al 1989) The addition ol this nitrogen to agricultural plots and foicsts could be causing an accumulation ol between 0 5 and 1 0 Pg carbon in soils and woody vegetation (Melillo pnvate communication) Howcvei it should be noted that the greater availability of nitrogen is at least (oi the foicsts associated with increasing levels of pollutants which could reduce plant growth We are unceitain about the net effects on the terrestrial carbon balance ol eutiophication and toxification of mid-latitude ecosystems of the Northcin Hemisphere

10.3.2	Reforestation as a Means of Managing Atmospheric CO2

It is sometimes suggested that we should lcversc the longterm trend of land cleanng and grow new foicsts to absorb the excess CO2 Is this suggestion a icasonablc one’ What rates of carbon uptake and storage can we expect’ How

much land area would be needed to make a difference’ How long would the uptake continue’

Recently Jarvis (1989) estimated that a rapidly growing forest in the temperate zone can accumulate a mean of 2 7tC/ha annually for almost 100 years To accumulate 1 Pg C per annum, the equivalent of about 17% of current annual fossil fuel CO2 emissions, the new growing foicst would have to occupy 370 x 106 ha This is an area equivalent to about one half the size of the Amazon Basin

The accumulation will not be linear Early on it will be rapid, but as the forest matures the accumulation will slow down until the annual respiration rate ol the forest is about equal to caibon uptake II the foicst is left unmanaged the trees will eventually die at different times and be leplaccd naturally, over a large area net uptake of CCb by the vegetation from the atmosphere and return of CO2 by organic matter decomposition to the atmosphere will be in balance and the forest will no longer act as a net carbon sink

Houghton (1990) has made a similar set oi calculations for the tropics He first made an estimate of land available in the tropics for afforestation Counting only lands that supported forests in the past and that are not currentl} used for either crops or settlement, he concluded that 500 x 1 ()6 ha of tropical lands could be relorested He also icasoned that an additional 365 x 106 ha could be reforested if the current area occupied by the ciops and fallow oi shifting cultivation was reduced to the area required to produce similai yields under low-input continuous cultivation The total area, 865 x 10^ ha is larger (by about 25%) than the Amazon Basin

Since much of the land that would be involved in the reforestation is probably degraded (low in plant nutrients especially phosphorus) the aveiage iate of caibon accumulation was estimated b_\ Houghton to be about 1 7tC/ha Given these estimates ol available land and carbon accumulation rate Houghton calculated that about 1 5 Pg C might be withdrawn 110m the atmospheie each year over the next centuiy (150 Pg C total) Altet that time the new forest if leit untouched would be in steady-state with respect to carbon exchange with the atmospheie Houghton noted that the estimate is optimistic because it fails to consider ownership of the land the expense ol teforestation or the ability of degraded lands to glow trees even at the modest rates used in his calculations

Although simple, these calculations aic impoitant because they illustrate the enormity of the task facing us il we decide to manage atmosphenc CCb by affoiestation

10.3.3	Methane and Nitrous Oxide Fluxes

The trace gas concentrations of the Earth s atmospheie have been increasing for mote than a centuiy (Section 1) Microbial activity is the dominant source to the atmosphere of two of these gases methane (CH4 ) and nitious oxide

(N2O) Climatic factors play an important part in controlling the rates at which these gases are produced In addition, atmospheric inputs of nitrogen and sulphui to ecosystems may affect CH4 production and consumption Nitrogen additions to ecosystems as well as forest dealing can stimulate N2O production The controls on the fluxes of these two gases are discussed below

103 3 I Methane

Bacteria known as "methanogens produce methane These organisms can only metabolize and live in the strict absence of oxygen Methanogenic ecosystems usually aie aquatic, such as swamps, marshes, lens paddies lakes tundra, and so on, where oxygen-deficient zones develop due to O2 consumption by respiration and limitation of Cb diffusion lrom the atmosphere Other ecosystems such as wet meadows, potholes, and inundation zones, may be methane producers for at least part of the year but may support consumption of atmospheiic CH4 when they dry up Most of the aerobic soils do not support CH4 production and emission, quite the contrary, they seem to function as CH4 consumption sites (Seiler and Conrad 1987, Steudler et al , 1989) The guts ol teimites and the rumens of cattle are also anoxic methanogenic env lronmenls An overview of the relative importance of various sources and sinks for CH4 are given in Section 1 (Table 1 2)

A number of factors besides the oxygen status of the environment contiol CH4 production These factors include temperature, the availability of carbon substrate, pH and electron acceptors

Most methanogenic bacteria have temperature optima of 30-40°C Thus, if the supply of oigamc mattci is not limiting, increasing the temperature generally will stimulate CH4 production in most methanogenic environments It is estimated that a temperatuie increase of 1()°C will lead to a 2 5 3 5 fold mciease in CH4 production (Comad et al , 1987) This assumes no change in soil moisture, that is, the soils remain waterlogged

Warming in high latitude ecosystems such as wet tundia and the boreal wetlands will almost ceitainly lead to increased CH4 emissions from these ecosystems which cuncntly account for the release of about 40 Tg of CH4 to the atmosphere annually Based on the simple relationship between temperature and methanogenic activity described above, a 4°C rise in temperature in the soils of the high latitude systems could lead to a 45% to 65% increase in methane release from these systems If warming is accompanied by drying, then there may ultimately be a reduction of CH4 release to the atmosphere since the soils would become oxygen filled, a condition unsuitable for the methanogens Under drier conditions the carbon-rich northern soils would become net sources of CO2 until a new equilibrium was reached between caibon inputs from

plants and CO2 loss associated with decomposition (see 10 2 2 2 3)

Sediments 01 anaerobic soils rich in organic matter are olten active in CH4 production The addition of organic substrates to methanogenic sites generally stimulates CH4 production, provided that temperature and pH are not major limiting factors Most methanogenic bacteria grow optimally in a narrow range around pH 7 (Conrad and Schutz, 1988)

Bicarbonate functions as the electron acceptor during the process of methanogenesis Electron acceptors such as nitrate and sulfate in general are preferred over bicarbonate and thus inhibit CH4 production So, any input of oxidized compounds such as sulfate or nitrate in fertilizers or acid tain will reduce CH4 production The significance of this reduction for the global CH4 budget is unclear at this time, but it is not likely to be large

The major sink for CH4 is reaction with OH in the tropospheie Soils also function as a sink for CH4, with the magnitude of the sink being in the range of 30 ± 15 Tg CH4 per year Recent evidence indicates that the magnitude of the soil sink for CH4 is controlled by temperature moisture and some aspects of the nitrogen cycle in the soil (Steudler et al , 1989) Warmei temperatures increase CH4 uptake by aerobic soils, while high soil moisture and high rates of nitrogen turnover in soils reduce CH4 uptake The argument has been made that the eutrophication of the soils of the mid latitudes of the temperate region, with 18 Tg N per year associated with acid ram, may have reduced CH4 uptake by soils enough to have contributed to the atmospheric increase of CH4 (Melillo et al , 1989) The logic here is that either a reduction in a CH4 sink or an increase in a CH4 source will lead to an increase in atmospheric CH4 content since the gas has such a long lifetime in the atmosphere While this nitrogcn-mcthanc interaction is an interesting example of a subtle impact of industrialisation on the global environment, the importance of this mechanism is not yet established

103 3 2 Nitious oxide

Our cunent understanding of the global budget of N2O is reviewed in Section 1 (Table 1 4) The budget is largely controlled by microbial processes

Nitrous oxide can be produced by four processes denitrification, nitrification, assimilatory nitrate reduction and chemodenitrification Of these processes, denitrification in aerobic soils is probably the most important source of N2O (Matson and Vitousek, 1990) Denitrification is defined as the dissimilatory reduction of oxides of nitrogen to produce N2O and N2 by a diverse group of bacteria

The cellular controllers ol denitrification are O2 nitrate (NO3) and carbon Moisture has an indirect effect on

denitrification by influencing the O2 content of soil 11 other conditions are appropriate, then temperature becomes an important controller of denitrification rate

Tiedje (1988) has suggested that the controllers of denitrification vary among habitats He indicated that oxygen availability is the dominant factor limiting denitrification in habitats that are exposed to the atmosphere, such as soil, while in dominantly anaerobic habitats, such as sediments, NO3 is the most important cellular controller When anaerobic zones occur in soils, then NO3 availability, or carbon availability, as controlled by wetting and drying or freezing and thawing cycles, can become a critical factor in controlling denitrification In fertilized soils, carbon is commonly second in importance after Cb, whereas in unfertilized soils, is often second in importance

Demtrifiers in the natural environment arc capable of producing either N2O or N2 as end products Numerous factors have been reported to affect the proportion of N2O produced relative to N2 in denitrifying cells and soils If the availability of oxidant (N-oxide) greatly exceeds the availability of reductant (most commonly carbon), then the oxidant may be incompletely utilized, that is, N oxides will not be completely reduced to N2 In other words, the dominant product ol denitrification may be N2O in systems where, at least for a time, nitrate supply is high and carbon supply is low, but not excessively so (Firestone and Davidson, 1989)

A wetter climate may lead to increased N2O production since soil moisture influences O2 availability to microbes and low oxygen tension is a precondition of denitrification Warming will accelerate N2O production by accelerating the nitrogen cycle in the soil and making more nitrate available to the demtrifiers

In the tropics, conversion of forest to pasture has been shown to increase N2O flux (Luizao et al , 1990) Nitrous oxide emissions also increase immediately after forest harvest in the temperate zone (Bowden and Bormann. 1986) In both of these cases, ecosystem disturbance has resulted in warmei and wetter soils that are cycling nitrogen more rapidly than pre-disturbance soils

10.3.4	Ecosystem Change and Regional Hydrologic Cycles

Vegetation affects continental and regional hydrology by influencing the processes of evapotranspiration and surface runoff Inclusion of vegetation m general circulation model simulations influences continental rainfall and other climate paramaters (e g , Sellers, 1987, Sato et al , 1989) At the regional scale, Pielke and co-workers have shown that vegetation influences boundary layer growth and dynamics, and that vegetation mosaics affect small-scale and meso scale circulations, convective activity and rainfall (Avissar and Pielke, 1989)

At the continental scale, several simulations have been done on the climatic impact of complete deforestation of the Amazon Basin (Henderson-Sellers and Gormtz, 1984, Wilson, 1984, Dickinson and Henderson Sellers, 1988, Lean and Warnlow, 1989, Nobre et al 1990) The Amazon Basin contains about half of the world s tropical rainforests and plays a significant role in the climate of that region It is estimated that approximately half of the local rainfall is derived from local evapotranspiration (Salati et al , 1978) The remainder is derived from moisture advected from the surrounding oceans A major modification of the forest cover could therefore have a significant climatic impact Reduced evapotranspiration and a general reduction in rainfall, although by variable amounts, was found in most simulations

The studies by Lean and Warnlow (1989) and Nobre et al (1990) show reductions of about 20% in rainfall in simulations in which forest was replaced by grassland Lean and Warnlow showed that albedo and roughness changes contributed almost equally to the rainfall reduction Nobre et al suggest that the switch to a more seasonal rainfall regime, which they obtained, would prevent forest lecovery

Recall that these simulations were ' all or nothing , forest or grassland The consequences of intermediate changes (partial land conversion) have not yet been studied but, given the nonlinearity of the coupled vegetation-climate system, may not be intermediate The consequences of fragmentation of continental ecosystems and partial conversion will need to be studied using mesoscale simulations as well as by using general circulation models, and both must be pursued

Consequences of altered ecosystem-atmosphere exchange on runoff, resulting from changing vegetation have not been much studied but are of major importance Appropriate regional scale simulations for runoff routing and river flow are just now being developed (e g Vorosmarty et al 1989) and will be crucial tools in evaluating the surface hydrology component of the hydrologic cycle, and its interactions with ecosystems and climate

The central issue for upcoming research in this area is to analyze the feedbacks between vegetation and climate to understand how the effects of climate forcing will be modulated by vegetation response This question has two components First, the biophysical coupling between vegetation and the atmosphere must be understood and quantified to allow simulation of evapotranspiration, albedo and roughness as a function of vegetation attributes Second, the response of vegetation to climate forcing must be understood and quantified so that in our models vegetation structure and physiology can change as climate changes Coupling these two allows for feedback this must then be analyzed on a regional basis to determine the

potential for positive and negative feedbacks between ecosystems and the almosphete This effort must include global and regional simulations and large-scale field studies for parameterization and validation

10.3.5	Summary

The eficcts of ecosystem change on the net carbon balance oi terrestrial ecosystems is potentially laige but it is uncertain Deforestation is clearly a source of cat bon to the atmosphere of 1 6 ± 1 0 Pg annually The net carbon balance of mid-latitude ecosystems of the temperate zone is uncertain The combination of foiest regrowth and eutiophication of these systems with mtiogen appeals to be causing them to function as carbon sinks in the range of 1 5 to 3 0 Pg annually The combined effects of wood burning and decay of cut wood and the toxification of mid-latitude ecosystems with a variety of pollutants may be offsetting the caibon uptake in these systems The magnitude of net carbon storage in mid latitude terrestrial ecosystems ol the Northern Hemisphere is very uncertain

The management of atmospheric CCb by global-scale reforestation will be an enormous task To lemove just 1 Pg C annually by this mechanism would require a vciy large area

Warmer and wetter soil conditions have the potential foi increasing the fluxes of CH4 and N2O from terrestrial ecosystems to the atmosphere If the noithern wetland soils aie warmed by 4°C, the CH4 flux to the atmosphere could increase by as much as 36 Tg annually If the soil moisture decreases in northern ecosystems, CH4 production would be decreased while CO2 flux would increase

At the regional scale, changes in vegetation structure such as deforestation, have the potential to alter the hydrological cycle Both precipitation and surface runoff can be affected We do not yet have models to predict the ailects of complex changes in land use patterns on regional hydiology

10.4 Marine Ecosytems and Climate Change

10.4.1	Climate Change and Community Response

Based on the record of the past there is little doubt that global warming will result in different distributions of marine planktonic organisms than those of today (CLIMAP Protect 1976) If the ocean warming were to be simply and positively correlated with latitude the expansion of habitat in a poleward direction which has occurred during the Holocene, would continue But since the rate ol change is expected to be very rapid (see Section 5), questions immediately arise regarding the potential of the biota to accommodate to these rates of change

Changes in temperatuie and piecipitation will have an influence on the circulation ol surface wateis and on the mixing of deep water with suiface water This mixing

exchanges water to great depth in a few places in the ocean such as the North Atlantic Changes in circulation and/or a restriction of the mixing could reduce ocean productivity

The palaeo record for global temperature patterns during 1 ecent ice age cycles and the output of geneial circulation models that simulate increases in global temperatures resulting Horn higher concentiations of ladiatively active gases in the troposphere both indicate that the warmer the planet the less the meridional gradient in temperature Temperatures in polar regions could warm 2-3 times the global mean warming associated with a doubling of the equivalent ol preindustrial atmospheric CO2 concentiations

At high latitudes wanning would result in diminished temporal and spatial extent of sea-ice some models even predict an ice-free Arctic A significant reduction in the extent and persistence of sea-ice in either polar region would have piofound consequences for marine ecosvstems Sea-ice itself is a critical habitat for Arctic marine plankton (Clarke 1988) The underneath of the ice and interstices in the ice are highly pioductive habitats for plankton The low light in winter limits pnmaiy production in the water column, and the relatively high concentrations of algae living on and actually in the ice, are an important source of food for heibivores both while sea-ice is in place and when it bieaks up in the spring The quantitative importance of sea-ice in the high latitude marine ecosystem is now well established with impoitant food web implications for fish seabirds and marine mammals (Gulliksen and Lonne, 1989) During the spring melting the resultant freshwater lens is also believed to be critical in the life cycle of many pelagic polar species The most intense aggregations or blooms of plankton occur at the ice margin, evidently in response to the density stratification resulting from the overlying lens of fresh water, and perhaps also in response to the release of nutrient materials that had accumulated in the ice Although total global primary production for a polar region might not be very different with or without the ice edge blooms such transient peaks in plankton abundance can be cntical in the life cycle of certain higher trophic level organisms, and are most definitely of importance in terms of the flux of carbon to deep water and the ocean floor

Certain marine animals, mammals and birds in particular have life history strategies that reflect adaptation to sea ice An extreme case may be the polar bear, which shares ancestors with the grizzly bear, and would not exist today had it not been for the reliability of the ice habitat for hunting its primary prey, the seal

In sub-polar and temperate waters the effects of global warming on the plankton habitat in near surface waters aie at piesent unpredictable Physical, chemical and biological conditions in these regions aie mheiently variable on both seasonal and annual bases This results primal lly lrom the

variability in atmospheric forcing including surface heat exchange with the atmosphere and associated thermal stratification and destratification in the upper ocean seasonal storm events and associated mixing, and cloud cover These processes and pioperties determine the mass upward flux of nutrients irom the deep ocean the residence time of plankton in the upper sunlit region of the water column, and the availability of light at the surface of the sea These seasonal variations in conditions give rise to seasonality in primary production with attendant blooms and corresponding high rates of organic carbon flux to the deep-sea (Honjo, 1984)

Long-term oceanographic studies in several regions demonstrate high correlations between the abundance and productivity of marine ecosystems and atmospheric conditions A clear example of this is the 1950 80 period in the vicinity of the United Kingdom During this period there was a decline in the abundance of plankton that has been correlated with changes in wind stiength and direction (Dickson et al 1988) Tempeiature changes per se were small and poorly correlated with the plankton changes and it is judged that changes in wind driven mixing in the upper ocean was the primary factor contributing to the decline in plankton abundance From studies such as this it seems likely that the type of climate changes being forecast in association with increased radiative forcing in the troposphere will have significant effects on plankton abundance and productivity

In addition the effect of intensity and frequency of mixing events on plankton assemblages depends on the physiology and structure of the plankton Diatoms for example, arc phytoplankton that typically dominate in cold nutrient-rich waters such as those that aie seasonally well mixed Because they have high sinking rates diatoms require a turbulent mixed layer in order to remain successful constituents of the plankton community (Smayda, 1970) Diatoms are the preferred food for many organisms in the marine food web and when ieplaced by other types of phytoplankton fish productivity can be dramatically reduced (Baiber and Chavez 1983) The dense cell encasement of the diatom helps to explain why these phytoplankton are an important contributoi to the flux of organic carbon to the deep sea

Along-shore winds contribute to the mixing of deep water with surface water in many coastal wateis and acioss the equatorial Pacific The direction, intensity duration and frequency of these wind events determine the extent and timing of the mixing events Because this process which is typically highly seasonal, is very important in stimulating the primary production processes that lie at the base of the food webs for many species it can be anticipated that the global climate change will affect higher trophic levels, including fish in these legions

10.4 2 Interaction Between the Land and the Ocean

Climate change has the potential to change the iate of delivery ol materials from the land to the ocean and such changes could aflect the biological component ol ocean ecosystems For example climate change could lead to an increase in wind erosion and the dehveiy ol line particles by aeolian transport from the continents to the surface ocean Depending on their composition such particles could have either a biostimulatoiy (Martin and Fitzwater 1987) or a biotoxic effect on oceanic productivity and othet marine processes Similarly climate change could increase water-driven erosion and the amount ol material transported to the world s coastal oceans by river systems Again the effects will be dependent on the nature of the terrestrial material

10 4 3 Interactions Between the Ocean and the Atmosphere

Climate-induced changes in ocean ecology are of importance in relation both to the sustainability and man agement of living resources and to biogeochemical feedback on the climate system Several atmospheiic feedback processes are well-defined in General Circulation Models but those relating to ocean productivity are not yet sufficiently well understood to be included The three mam effects of global warming that are expected to opeiate on ocean plankton (as mentioned above) would all tend to decrease the ocean uptake of CCb 1 e a positive feedback

Ocean waters are currently a major source of dimethylsulphide (DMS) to the atmosphere The oxidized products of this DMS which is produced by plankton may increase cloudiness through nucleation on sulphate aerosols in the troposphere (Charlson et al 1987) and may increase albedo in the stratosphere lrom sulphate aerosols (Ryaboshapko 1983) One gioup of plankton the Coccolithophorids are apparently a major source ol DMS and their bloom processes would most likely respond although in uncertain ways to changes in ocean-atmospheie exchanges resulting horn climate change

While neithei the direction nor magnitude of many ol these effects is known with certainty changes from present day values are expected to be greatest in mid to high latitude ocean legions There is evidence foi major changes in the functioning of North Atlantic ecosystems in the transitions between glacial and inter-glacial penods (Broecker and Denton 1990) supporting the view that changes in ocean plankton, once initiated may enhance the iate of climate change (the plankton multiplier) until a new neat equilibrium is reached

10 4 4 The Carbon System and the Biological Pump

The oceans are by far the largest active icscivoh of c ubon Recent estimates of the total amount of dissolved inoi^inie caibon in the sea establish its range as between ->4 000 inn

38,000 Pg carbon Only a small fraction is CO2 (mole fraction 0 5 percent), the bicarbonate ion with a mole traction of 90 percent and the carbonate ion with a mole fraction of just under 10 percent are the dominant forms of dissolved inorganic carbon The dissolved organic carbon pool has been reported to be similar in size to the pool of terrestrial soil carbon, but recent data suggest that it may in fact be considerably larger

Although the oceans are the largest active reservoirs of carbon and cover 70 percent of the globe the total marine biomass is only about 3 x Pg carbon (though such estimates are uncertain at best), or just over 0 5 percent of the carbon stored in terrestrial vegetation On the other hand, the total primary production is 30 to 40 x Pg carbon/yr A portion of this production results in a sink for atmospheric CO2, primarily through the sinking of particulate carbon As a consequence of this biological pump, the concentration of dissolved inorganic carbon is not uniform with depth, the concentration in surface waters is 10 to 15 percent less than that in deeper waters There is a corresponding depletion of phosphorus and nitrogen in surface waters, even in areas of intense upwelling, as a result of biological uptake and loss of detrital material

The fate of this material depends, in part upon its chemical characteristics If it is in the form of organic tissue, then it is oxidized at intermediate depths which results in an oxygen minimum and a carbon nitrogen, and phosphorus maximum If it is carbonate it dissolves below the lysocline, raising both alkalinity and the concentration of carbon, at depths where the high pressure increases the solubility of calcium carbonate

Thus the biological pump' lowers the partial pressure of CO2 in surface waters and enhances the partial pressure in waters not in contact with the atmosphere The functioning of the biological pump involves the supply of nutrients to surface waters, food web dynamics, and sinking losses of particulates to the deep sea It may be expected to respond both to changes in the strength of the overall thermohaline circulation and to variations in the abundance of nutrients primarily nitrogen and phosphorus

A portion of the nutrient flux to the surface returns to the deep sea unused by the biota carried along by the return flow of waters in downwelling systems at high latitude It is important to define the physical, chemical and biological processes that regulate the concentration of organic nutrients in descending water masses, the flux of so-called preformed nutrients The concentration of preformed nutrients may be expected to reflect physical processes, and it can be influenced also by biological activity to the extent that this activity can result in packaging of carbon nitrogen and phosphate in fecal material that can fall to the deep, providing a path for transfer of nutrients from the surface to the deep independent of the physical processes

such as those responsible for the formation of deep water in high latitudes

10.4.5	Summary

Climate change can affect the productivity and the storage of organic carbon in marine ecosystems The community composition of marine ecosystems will also be affected Details of these effects cannot be predicted at the present time There is also the possibility that the net exchange of trace gases (e g , organic sulphur gases) between the oceans and the atmosphere could be altered but this, too, is uncertain

References

Anderson J M 1973 Carbon dioxide evolution from two deciduous woodland soils Journal of Applied Ecology 10 361 378

Armentano TV and E S Menges, 1986 Patterns of change in the carbon balance of organic soil wetlands of the temperate zone Journal oj Ecology 74 755 774

Atjay G L P Ketner and P Duvigneaud, 1979 Teresstnal primary production and phytomass, pp 129 182 In B Bolin E Degens S Kempe and P Ketner (eds ) The Global Cai bon Cycle SCOPE 13 Wiley Chichester

Avissar R and R A Pielke 1989 A parameterization of heterogeneous land surfaces for atmospheric numerical models and its impact on regional meteorology Ameiican Me teoi ologic al Soc icty 117 2113

Barber RT and F P Chavez 1983 Biological consequences of El Nino Scicnce222 1203 1210

Bazzaz FA and R W Carlson 1984 The response of plants to elevated CO2 I Competition among an assemblage of annuals at different levels of soil moisture Oecologia (Berlin) 62 196 198

Billings W D JO Luken D A Mortensen and K M Petersen

1982	Arctic tundra A sink or source for atmospheric carbon dioxide in a changing environment9 Oecologia (Berlin) 53 7 11

Billings W D JO Luken D A Mortensen and K M Peterson

1983	Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide possible effects on arctic tundra Oecologia (Berl ) 58 286 289

Billings W D KM Peterson J D Luken and D A Mortensen

1984	Interaction of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide and soil nitrogen on the carbon balance of tundra microcosms Oecologia 65 26 29

Bolin B 1986 How much CO2 will remain in the atmosphere9 pp 93 155 In B Bohn B Doos, J Jager and R Warrick (eds) The Giccnhouse Effect Climate Change and Ecoyyytcmy SCOPE 29 John Wiley and Sons London

Bowden WB and F H Boorman 1986 Transport and loss of nitrous oxide in soil water after forest clear cutting Sc lenc c 233 867 869

Brady NC 1974 The nature and properties of soils MacMillans New York

Broecker, W S , and G H Denton, 1990 What drives glacial cycles’ Scientific Ameiicon 262 49-56

Bunnell, F , D E N Tait, P W Flanagan and K Van Cleve, 1977 Microbial respiration and substrate weight loss I A general model ol the influences of abiotic variables Soil Biology and Biochemist! y 9 33 40

Canneli, MGR, and R I Smith 1986 Climatic warming, spring budburst and frost damage on trees / Appl Ei ol 23 177 191

Carlyle, JC and TU Ba, 1988 Abiotic controls of soil respiration beneath an eighteen-year-old Pinus radiata stand in Southeast Australia Journal of Ecology 76 654-662

Charlson, R J , J E Lovelock, M O Andreae and S G Warren 1987 Oceanic phytoplankton atmospheric sullur cloud albedo and climate Natuie 326 655-661

Carter, K N , and S D Prince 1981 Epidemic models used to explain biogeographical distribution limits Natuie 293 644 645

Charlson, R J , J E Lovelock M O Andreae and S G Warren, 1987 Oceanic phytoplankton atmospheric sulfur, cloud albedo and climate Natiuc 326 655 661

Clarke, A, 1988 Seasonality in the Antarctic marine environment Comp Biol hem Physiol 90B 461 473

CLIMAP Project, 1976 The surface of the ice age earth Science 191 1131 1137

Conrad, R , and H Schutz 1988 Methods of studying methanogenic bactena andmethanogenic activities in aquatic environments Pp 301 343 in B Austin (cd ) Methods in Acpiatic Bactetioloi;y Chichester Wiley

Conrad, R , H Schutz and M Babbel 1987 Tempcialure limitation of hydrogen tuinovei and methanogenesis in anoxic paddy soil FEMS Mn toluol rcol 45 281-289

Curtis, P S , B G Drake P W Leadly, W Arp and D Whigham

1989	Growth and senescence of plant communities exposed to elevated CO2 concentrations on an estuai me marsh Oei olcya (Berlin) 78 20 26

Curtis, P , L M Balduman B G Drake and D F Whigham

1990	The effects of elevated atmospheric CO2 on belowground pioccsses in C3 and C4 estuanne marsh communities Ecology, in press

Davis, MB, 1981 Quaternary history and the stability of forest communities, pp 132-153 In DC West HH Shugart and DB Botkin (eds ) Foicst Succession Springer Verlag New York

Davis, MB, 1981 Quaternary history and the stability of forest communities Pp 132-153 in DC West HH Shugart and D B Botkin (eds ) Finest Succession Springer Verlag, New York

Davis, M B , 1988 Ecological Systems and Dynamics Pp 69106 in Tonatd an Undei standing oj Global Chant’e National Academy Press, Washington, DC

Dickinson, RE and A Henderson-Sellers, 1988 Modelling tropical deforestation A study ol GCM land surface parametenzations Quail J R Met Soc 114 439 462

Dickson, R R , P M Kelly, J M Colebrook W C Wooster and DH Cushing, 1988 North winds and production in the eastern North Atlantic I Plankt Res 10 151 169

Drake BG PW Leadley W Arp PS Cuitis and D Whigham 1989 The effect of elevated atmosphenc CO2 on C3 and C4 vegetation on Chesapeake Bay Proceedings ol the Symposium on the Physiological Ecology of Aquatic Plants Aarhus, Denmark

Eichner, M , 1990 Nitrous oxide emissions from fertilized soils summary ol available data available lorn nal of Fn\ 11 onmc ntal Quality 19 272-280

Emanuel, W R , H H Shugart and M P Stevensohn 1985a Climate change and the broad-scale distribution of terrestrial ecosystem complexes Climatic Change 7 29 43

Emanuel WR, HH Shugart and MP Stevenson 1985b Response to comment Climatic change and the broad scale distribution of terrestrial ecosystem complexes Climatic Change 7 457 460

Fajer ED MD Bowers and F A Bazzazz 1989 The effects of enriched carbon dioxide atmospheres on plant insect herbivore interactions Science 243 1198-1200

Farquhar GD and T D Sharkey 1982 Stomatai conductance and photosynthesis Annua! Rcsicms of Plant Physiology 33 317-345

Fetcher, N CH Jaeger BR Strain and N Sionit 1988 Long term elevation of atmospheric CO2 concentration and the carbon exchange rates of saplings of Pinus taeda and Liquid ambei styraciflua L Ti ee Physiology 4 255-262

Firestone MK and E A Davidson, 1989 Microbial basis lor NO and N2O production and consumption in soil, pp 7 22 In M O Andreae and D S Schimel (eds ) Eychani’c of Tiacc Case s hetvseeen I en est/ tai Ecosystems and the Atmosplieic Fitter, A H , and R K M Hay, 1981 Environmental Physiology ol Plants Academic Press, London pp 355

Gifford R M 1979 Growth and yield of CO2 ennehed wheat under water limited conditions Aust J Plant Physiol 6 367 378

Gifford, R M , 1990 The effect of CO2 and climate change on photosynthesis, net primary production and net ecosystem production Ecological Applications (submitted)

Gifford, R M , H Lambers and J I L Morison 1985 Respuation of crop species under CO2 enrichment Physiolotpa Plantai urn 63 351 356

Goudriaan J , and H E de Ruiter, 1983 Plant response to CO2 enrichment, at two levels of nitrogen and phosphorous supply 1 Dry matter leaf area and development Ncth I Aipic Set 31 157-169

Graham R W , 1986 Response of mammalian communities to environmental changes during the late Quaternary Pp 300 31 3 in J Diamond and TJ Case (eds) Community Ecology Harper & Row, New York

Gulliksen, B , and O J Lonne, 1989 Distribution, abundance and ecological importance of marine symnpagic fauna in the Arctic Rapp P 1 Renn Cons hit Explcn Mu 188:133 138

Hanson J G Russell, D Rind, P Stone, A Lacis S Lebedetf

R Ruedy and L Travis 1983 Efficient three-dimensional global models for climate studies Models I and II April Monthly Wcathei Rcsiesy 3(4) 609-662

Hanson A G , and W D Hitz 1982 Metabolic responses of mesophytes to plant water deficits Ann Res Plant Physiol 33 163-203

Hardy, R.W.F. and U.D. Havelka, 1975: Photosynthate as a major factor limiting N2 fixation by field grown legumes with emphasis on soybeans. Pp. 421-439 in: R. S. Nutman (ed.) Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation in Plants, Cambridge University Press, London.

Heal, O.W., P.W. Flanagan, D.D. French and S.F. MacLean, 1981: Decomposition and accumulation of organic matter. Pp. 587-633 in: L. C. Bliss, O. W. Heal and J. J. Moore (eds.) Tundra Ecosystems: A Comparative Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Hincklenton, P.R. and P.A. Jolliffe, 1980: Alterations in the physiology of CO2 exchange in tomato plants grown in CCD-enriched atmospheres. Canadian Journal of Botany 58:21812189.

Henderson-Sellers, A., and V. Gornitz, 1984: Possible climatic impacts of land cover transformations, with particular emphasis on tropical deforestation. Climatic Change. 6:231-258.

Holdridge. L.R., 1947: Determination of world plant formations from simple climatic data. Science 105:367-368.

Holdridge, L.R., 1964: Life Zone Ecology. Tropical Science Center, San Jose. Costa Rica.

Honjo, S.. 1984: The study of ocean duxes in time and space by bottom tethered sediment trap arrays. GOFFS Proceedings of a Workshop, National Academy Press. Washington, D.C.

Houghon. R.. 1990: The global effects of tropical deforestation. Environmental Science and Technology. 24:414-422.

Hsaio. T.. 1973: Plant responses to water stress. Annual Reviews of Plant Physiology 24:519-570.

Hunt. H.W.. 1977: A simulation model for decomposition in grasslands. Ecology 58:469-484.

Huntley. B. and H.K.B. Birks, 1983: An atlas of past and present pollen maps of Europe: 0-13.000 years ago. Cambridge University Press.

Idso. S.B., B.A. Kimball, M.G. Anderson and J.R. Mauney, 1987: Effects of atmospheric CO2 enrichment on plant growth: the interactive role of air temperature. Agriculture, Ecosystems and the Environment 20:1-10.

Israel. Yu A.. L.M. Filipova, L.M. Insarov. G.E. Semenov and F.N. Semeniski, 1983: The background monitoring and analysis of the global change in biotic states. Problems of Ecological Monitoring and Ecosystem Modelling. IV:4-15.

Jarvis, P.G.. 1989: Atmospheric carbon dioxide and forests. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London B 324:369-392.

Johnson. W.C., and C.M. Sharpe, 1983: The ratio of total to merchantable forest biomass and its application to the global carbon budget. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 13:372383.

Kimball. B.A., 1983: Carbon-dioxide and agricultural yield: An assemblage and analysis of 430 prior observations. Agronomy Journal 75:779-788

Kramer, P.J.,	1981: Carbon dioxide concentration,

photosynthesis, and dry matter production. BioScience 31:2933.

Lamb. H.H., 1977: Climate: Present. Past and Future. Vol. 2, London, Methuen, pp. 835

Larigauderie. A., D.W. Hilbert and W.C. Oechel, 1988: Interaction between high CCD concentrations and multiple environmental stresses in Bromus mollis. Oecologia 77:544549.

Lashof, D.A., 1989: The dynamic greenhouse: feedback processes that may influence future concentrations of atmospheric trace gases and climatic change. Climatic Change 14:213-242.

Lean. J., and D.A. Warrilow, 1989: Simulation of the regional impact of Amazon deforestation. Nature 342:411-413.

Leonard, K.J. and W.E. Fry (eds.). 1986. Plant Disease Epidemiology, Population Dynamics and Management. Macmillan, New York. 372 pp.

Lincoln. D.E., N. Sionit and B.R. Strain, 1984: Growth and feeding response of Pseudoplusia includens (Lepidoptera:Noctuidae) to host plants grown in controlled carbon-dioxide atmospheres. Environmental Entomology 13:1527-1530.

Lincoln. D.E.. and D. Couvet and N. Sionit, 1986: Response of an insect herbivore to host plants grown in carbon dioxide enriched atmospheres. Oecologia (Berlin) 69:556-560.

Lincoln. D.E.. and D. Couvet. 1989: The effects of carbon supply on allocation to allelochemicalas and caterpillar consumption of peppermint. Oecologia (Berlin) 78:112-114..

Long, S.P., 1990: Primary production in grasslands and coniferous forests in relation to climate change: an overview of the information available for modelling change in this process. Ecological Applications (In press).

Luizao, F., P. Matson, G. Livingston, R. Luizao and P. Vitousek, 1990: Nitrous oxide flux following tropical land clearing. Global Biochemical Cycles, in press.

Luxmoore. R.J., E.G. O'Neill. J.M. Ellis and H.H. Rogers, 1986: Nutrient uptake and growth responses of Virginia pine to elevated atmospheric CO2- J. Environ. Qual. 15:244-251.

Manabe, S., and R.T. Wetherald, 1987: Large-scale changes in soil wetness induced by an increase in carbon-dioxide. Journal of Atmospheric Sciences. 44:1211 -1235.

Martin, J.H. and S. Fitzwater, 1987: Iron deficiency limits phytoplankton in the northeast Pacific subarctic. Nature 331:341-343.

Matson, P.A., and P.M. Vitousek, 1990: Ecosystem approaches for the development of a global nitrous oxide budget. Bioscience, in press.

McGill, W.B., C.A. Campbell, J.F. Doormaar, E.A. Paul and D.W. Anderson, 1981: PHOENIX - A model of the dynamics of carbon and nitrogen in grassland soils. In: F.E. Clark and T. Rosswall (eds.) Terrestrial Nitrogen Cycles. Ecological Bulletins, Stockholm.

McNulty. A.K., and W. Cummins, 1987: The relationship between respiration and temperature in leaves of the arctic plant Saxifraga cornua. Plant, Cell and Environment 10:319325.

Meentemeyer, V., 1978: Macroclimate and lignin control of litter decomposition rates. Ecology 59:465-472.

Meentemeyer, V., 1984: The geography of organic matter decomposition rates. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 74:551-560.

Melillo, J.M., 1983: Will increases in atmospheric CO2 concentrations effect decay processes? pp. 10-11 Annual Report, The Ecosystems Center, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA.

Melillo, J.M., J D. Aber and J.F. Muratore, 1982: The influence of substrate quality of leaf litter decay in a northern hardwood forest. Ec ology 63:621 -626

Melillo, J M., and J R. Gosz, 1983. Interactions oi biogeochemical cycles in forest ecosystems, pp. 177-222. In: B. Bolin and R.B. Cook (eds.), 77;e Ma)oi Biogeochemical Cycles and then Intel actions John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Melillo, J.M., J.R. Fruci, R A Houghton, B Moore 111 and D.L Skole, 1988: Land-use change in the Soviet Union between 1850 and 1980: causes of a net release of CCb to the atmosphere. Tellus 40B-116-128

Melillo, J.M., P.A. Steudler, J.D. Aber and R D Bowden, 1989: Atmospheric deposition and nutrient cycling, pp. 263-280. In M. O. Andreae and D S. Schimel (eds.), Exchange of Tiace Gases between Tenestiial Ecosystems and the Atmospliei e. Dahlem Workshop Report (LS) 47 John Wiley and Sons, New York.

Minderman, G, 1968 Addition, decomposition and accumulation of organic matter in forests. Journal of Ecology 56'355-362

Mooney, H.A., B.G Drake, R.J Luxmoore, W C Oechel and L.F. Pitelka, 1990' How will terrestrial ecosystems interact with the changing CO? concentration of the atmosphere and anticipated climate change’ Btosc tenc e, in press

Moore, T.R., 1984: Littei decomposition in a sub-arctic, sprucelichen woodland in eastern Canada Ecology 65'299-308

Nobre, C, J. Shukla and P Sellers, 1990: Amazon deforestation and climate change. Science 247 1322-1325

Norby, R.J., E.G O’Neill and R G. Luxmoore, 1986 Effects of atmospheric CO2 enrichment on the growth and mineral nutrition of Quercus alba seedlings in nutrient poor soil Plant Physiology 82:83-89

O'Neill, E.G., R.J. Luxmoore and RJ Norby. 1987: Elevated atmospheric CO2 effects on seedling growth, nutiient uptake, and rhizosphere bactenal populations of Liriodendron tulipilera L Plant and Soil 104 3-11

Oberbauer, S F., N Sionit, S J Hastings and W C Oechel. 1986' Effects of CO2 enrichment and nutntion on growth, photosynthesis and nutiient concentiation of Alaskan tundta plant species. Can J Bot. 64'2993-2998

Oechel, W.C. and B R. Strain, 1985 Native species responses Chapter 5, pp. 118-154 in B R Stiain and J D Cure (eds ) Duect Effects of Cai bcm Dioxide on I egetation, State-ol-the-Art Report. U. S Department ol Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Caibon Dioxide Reseaich Division. Washington, DC.

Oechel, W.C. and G.H Riechers, 1986. Impacts of increasing CO2 on natural vegetation, particularly tundra In: C Rosenzweig and R. Dickinson (eds.) Climate-Vegetation Intel actions OIES-UCAR Report OIES-2, Boulder, CO.

Oechel, W.C., and G.I. Riechers, 1987: Response ol a Tundra Ecosystem to Elevated Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide U S Department of Energy, Washington, DC

.Olson, J.S., J A. Watts and L J Allison. 1983 Carbon in Live Vegetation of major Woild Ecosystems United States Department of Energy, TR004 pp 164

Orchard, V A. and FJ. Cook, 1983: Relationships between soil respiration and soil moisture. Soil Biology and Biochemistis 15-447-453

Orchard, V.A., and FJ Cook, 1983. Relationships between soil respiration and soil moisture. Soil Biology and Biochemistis 15:447-453.

Overdieck, D , D Bossemeyer and H Lieth, 1984- Long-term effects of an increased CO2 concentration level on terrestrial plants in model-ecosystems I. Phytomass production and competition of Trifolium repens L. and Lolium perenne L Ptogiess m Biometeoiologv 3:344-352.

Paez, A . H Hollmers and B R. Strain, 1984; CO2 enrichment and water interaction on growth on two tomato cultivars Joni nal of Agi ic idlui al Sc tenc e 102'687-693

Parton, W.J., D S Schimel, C.V Cole and D.S Ojima, 1987, Analysis of factors contiolling soil organic matter levels in Great Plains grasslands. Soil Science Society of Amenca Join nal 51 1173-1179

Pastor, J. and W M. Post, 1986' Influence of climate, soil moisture and succession on forest soil carbon and nutrient cycles Biogeoc hemisti v 2'3-27.

Pastor, J and W.M. Post, 1988: Response of northern forests to CCD-induced climate change. Natme 334.55-58

Peterson, B J., and J M Melillo, 1985' The potential storage of carbon caused by eutrophication of the biospheie. Tellus 37B. 117-127.

Ritchie, J.C and G M. MacDonald, 1986. The patterns of postglacial spread of white spruce Joni nal of Biogeography 13 527-540

Ryaboshapko, A.G , 1983' The atmospheric sulphur cycle Pp 203-296 m: M V Ivanov and J. R. Freney (eds ) 1 he Global Biogeoc hemical Siilphm Cycle John Wiley & Sons, New Yoik.

Salati. E., J. Marques and L C B. Molion. 1978 Ongem e disti ibuicao das Chuvas na Amazonia Intel c tenc ici 3:200-206

Sage, R F , T.D Sharkey and J R. Seeman, 1989' Acclimation of photosynthesis to eleveated CO? in five C3 species Plant Phy siology 89 590-596.

Sato, N , P.J. Sellers, D A. Randall, E K. Schneider, J Shukla. J L Kintcr III, Y-T. Hou and E Albertazzi, 1989 Effects of implementing the simple biosphere model in a general circulation model Join nal of the Atmosphenc Sciences 46'2757-2769.

Schlesinger, W H., 1977' Carbon balance in terrestrial detritus Ann Rev Ecol Ssst 8'51-81

Schlesinger, W H , 1984' Soil organic matter a source ol atmosphenc CO2, pp 111-127. In: G. M. Woodwell (cd ). 'Ihe idle of Tenestiial Vegetation m the Global Caibon Cycle, Methods of Appiaising Changes, SCOPE 23 John Wiley and Sons, Chichester.

Seiler, W. and R. Conrad, 1987. Contribution of tropical ecosystems to the global budgets of trace gases, especially CH4, H2, CO and N2O. Pp. 133-162 in' R E Dickinson (ed ) The Geophvsiology of Amazonia Vegetation and Climate Interactions Wiley, New York

11

Narrowing the Uncertainties: A Scientific

Action Plan for Improved Prediction of Global Climate Change

G. MCBEAN, J. MCCARTHY

Contributors:

K. Browning; P. Morel; I. Rasool.

CONTENTS

Executive Summary	315
11.1 Introduction	317
11.2 Problem Areas and Scientific Responses	317
11.2.1 Control of the Greenhouse Gases by the	
Earth System	318
11.2.2 Control of Radiation by Clouds	318
11.2.3 Precipitation and Evaporation	320
11.2.4 Ocean Transport and Storage of Heat	320
11.2.5 Ecosystems Processes	321

11.3	Requirements for Narrowing Uncertainties in Future Climate Change	322

11.3.1	Improvement of the Global Atmosphere and

Land Surfaces Observing System	322

11.3.2	Development of a Global Ocean and Ice

Observing System	323

11.3.3	Establishment of a Comprehensive System

for Climate Monitoring	323

11.3.4	Development of Climate Models	324

11.3.5	International Research on Climate and Global

Change	325

11.3.6	Time-scales for Narrowing the Uncertainty	325

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The IPCC has the responsibility for assessing both the state of scientific knowledge of climate and climatic changes due to human influences The World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), sponsored by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the International Council for Scientific Unions (ICSU), and the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme (IGBP), sponsored by ICSU, together constitute the international framework of the quest for scientific understanding of climate and global change

The scientific strategy to achieve effective prediction of the behaviour of the climate system must be based on a combination of process studies, observation and modelling Sections 1 to 10 of this report identified several areas of scientific uncertainty and shortcomings To narrow these uncertainties, substantial scientific activities need to be undertaken The following 5 areas are considered the most critical

1)	control of the greenhouse gases by the Earth system,

2)	control of radiation by clouds,

3)	precipitation and evaporation,

4)	ocean transport and storage of heat, and

5)	ecosystem processes

Within the WCRP, the Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX) is addressing (2) and (3), while the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) is concerned with (4) and parts of (1) Two core activities of the IGBP, the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) and the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Piogramme (IGAC) are designed to investigate the contiol of gieenhouse gases by the oceanic and terrestrial biospheres while the Biospheric Aspects of the Hydrological Cycle (BAHC) is a complement to GEWEX that also addresses (3) An additional coie pioject of the IGBP focuses on Global Change and Tenestnal Ecosystems (GCTE) Both the WCRP and IGBP have other essential coie activities such as the Tropical Oceans - Global Atmospheie (TOGA) Programme and the study of Past Global Changes (PAGES), that contnbute to these efforts to reduce unceitainties in climate piedictions

Narrowing the unceitainties in futuie climate change predictions requires stiongly enhanced national paiticipation in these internationally cooidmated piogiammes

This will require incieased commitments io the endeavouis of the WCRP and the IGBP These piogiammes aie the iesult of many years of planning and they icpiesent consensus statements of the international science community legaiding the matunty of

the fundamentals that underpin these projects and the readiness of the community to commit to these timely endeavours

In order to proceed with this agenda, all nations must reaffirm their commitment to observe and document the fundamental aspects of the climate system and the changes occurring within it, including

1)	improvement of the global atmosphere and land surfaces observing system The World Weather Watch and Global Atmospheric Watch need to be fully implemented and augmented by improved atmospheric sounders radiometers and wind observations, active sensors lor wind and rain, vegetation sensors, and an improved commitment to quality control and archival of all data,

2)	development of a global ocean and ice observing system Satellite observations of ocean surface temperatuie, wind and topography, sea-ice concentiation and colour operational upper-ocean heat and freshwater monitoring and systematic sea-level and deep-ocean measurements are required,

3)	establishment of a comprehensive system foi climate monitoring It is essential that existing nctwoiks (WWW GAW, IGOSS, GEMS, GSLS) be maintained and wheie appropriate, enhanced Special attention needs to be given to calibration and quality control, documentation and international coordination and data exchange

The analysis and interpretation of the observational data will require the understanding arising from the piojects of the WCRP and the IGBP, and will involve the use of more relined climate models The next generation of predictive models will requue additional computing resources in order to incorporate the more sophisticated understanding of the climate system aiismg hom this research effort This effort will lead to predictions that have higher spatial resolution than can be attained at this time

The time scales for narrowing the uncertainties must be measured m terms of several years to more than a decade Advances must await the conduct ol several major expenments many of which will be about a decade in duration and the development of new technologies for space based observation and numerical computation It is essential that government funding agencies recognize the magnitude of both the financial and human lesourccs needed to undertake these reseaich progiammes anil make the necessary commitments

11.1	Introduction

In order to deal with the issues posed by increased atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations and to prepare human societies for the impacts of climate change, climate predictions must become more reliable and precise Present shortcomings include

Significant uncertainty, by a range of three, regarding the sensitivity of the global average temperature and mean sea-level to the increase in greenhouse gases,

Even larger uncertainties regarding regional climatic impacts, such that current climate change predictions have little meaning for any particular location,

Uncertainty in the timing of the expected climate change,

Uncertainty in the natural variations

To overcome these shortcomings, substantial improvements are required in scientific understanding which will depend on the creative efforts of individual scientists and groups Nevertheless the scale of the task demands international coordination and strong national participation

The IPCC has responsibility lor assessing the current state of scientific knowledge of climate and climatic changes due to human influences The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) established in 1980 the World Climate Research Piogramme (1) to promote scientific research on physical climate processes and to develop a capability ioi predicting climate variations Several major internationally coordinated climate research projects organized by the WCRP are now underway The Intergovernmental Oceanogiaphic Commission (IOC) assists with the oceanogiaphic component Furthermoie ICSU established in 1986 the Intei national Geospheie-Biosphere Programme (2) to study the interactive physical chemical and biological processes icsponsible loi change in the Earth system especially those which are most susceptible to change on time scales of decades to centuries The IGBP with its emphasis on biogeochemical aspects and the WCRP with its emphasis on physical aspects, together constitute the international framework of the quest for the scientific understanding of global change This report deals with climate change but it must be stressed that climate change is but one of a wide range of environmental issues that are confronting the world Many of these issues are linked and scientific study of one issue will frequently aid in understanding others

(1)	The World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) is jointly sponsoied by the Woild Meteoi ologic al Oi ganization and the Intel national Comic il of Sc lentific Unions The mam goals of the WCRP aie to deteinnnc to what extent ti ansient climatic sanations cue pi edic tabic and to lav the scientific foundation foi piedicting the iespouse of the Eaith's climate to natmal oi man made influences The mam components of the WCRP aie the numeiical expei/mentation pi ogi anime to des elop impi os ed models of the Ecu th's c Innate the Global Enc i gs and Watei Cycle Espeimient (GEWEX) the liopical Ocean and the Global Atmosphei e (TOGA) Pi ogi amine and the Woild Ocean Cu culation Espei inient (WOCE) Each pi oi’i amine includes a lange of piojects to studs specific aspects oi physical pi oc esses of the Ecu th system An example is the Intei national Satellite Cloud Climatology Pi ojec t to detei mine the quantitatis e effc c t of c loads on the Eai th i adiation ba lam c and c 11 mate

(2)	The International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) is an intei disciphnai y teseaich initialise of the International Council of Scientific Unions to desci ibe and undeistand the inteiactise physical chemical and biological piocesses that legulate the total Eaith system the unique ens u onment that it pi os ides foi life the changes that cue occ lining and the mannei m which changes an influenced by human actions A cential ob/cctiye of the IGBP is to establish the scientific basis foi quantitatis c assessments of changes in the Eaith s biogeochemical cycles including those which contiol the com intuition of ecu bon dioxide and othei chemicals m the atmosphei c

11.2	Problem Areas and Scientific Responses

To achieve effective prediction oi the behasiour of the climate system we must recognize that this ssstem is influenced by a complex arras of interacting phssical chemical and biological processes The scientific strategy to address these processes must include both obsers ation and modelling We must be able to understand the mechanisms responsible for past and present sanations and to incorporate these mechanisms into suitable models of the natural system The models can then be tun forssard in time to simulate the evolution of the climate ssstem Such a programme includes three essential steps

Analysis of observational data, often obtained lront incomplete and indirect measurements, to produce coherent information and understanding,

Application ol observational information and under standing to construct and validate time-dependent mathematical models of natural processes,

Running such models forward to produce predictions that can (and must) be tested against observations to determine their "skill" or reliability over relatively short time-periods

Sections 1 to 10 of this assessment have identified several areas of scientific uncertainty The following 5 areas are considered the most critical

11.2.1	Control of the Greenhouse Gases by the Earth System

Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere such as carbon dioxide and methane, are part of vast natural cycles Foi some greenhouse gases, the current rates of release which are directly attributable to human activities are small percentages of large natural fluxes between the atmosphere the ocean and terrestrial ecosystems while foi otheis human activities result in dominant emissions The atmospheric carbon content is a very small fiaction of existing reservoirs of carbon in ocean waters and sediments Relatively minor adjustments in the world ocean circulation and chemistry, or in the life cycle of teirestrial vegetation, could significantly aficct the amount of CO2 or CH4 in the atmosphere, even were anthropogenic emissions to be stabilized In particular, global warming is likely to decrease the absorption of carbon dioxide by sea water and lead to widespread melting of methane gas hydrates in and under the permaliost and also release CH4 Conversely, positive changes in the biogenic storage of carbon in the ocean could increase the oceanic CCb uptake and ameliorate the greenhouse effect

Current knowledge of oceanic and teirestrial biogeochemical processes is not yet sufficient to account quantitatively lor exchanges between the atmosphere, ocean and land vegetation (Section 1) The international Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) a core project of IGBP has been designed to investigate the oceanic biogeochemical processes relating to the cycle of carbon in the ocean and to assess the capacity of the ocean for absorbing CO2 (3) A central question being addressed relates to the role of the ocean and its circulation (see description of the World Ocean Cnculation Experiment in Section 112 4) in the uptake of CO2 pioduced horn the burning of fossil fuels This uptake occuts via both physical and biological processes Neithei is well quantified on a global scale, and the regulation ol the biological processes is at present only poorly undetstood In paiticular the biogeochemical processes responsible for the long-teim

stoiage of a portion of the total primary pioduction cannot at this time be resolved sufficiently in time and space to say how they might be affected by climate change The first component of JGOFS, relating to piocess studies, began with a pilot study in the North Atlantic in 1989 Two timeseries of measurements have been initiated at stations in the vicinity of Bermuda and Hawaii JGOFS will result in an order of magnitude impiovement in the precision of the assessment of the ocean s role in sequestering CO2 from the atmosphere

(3)	The Joint Global Flux Study (JGOFS), a c 01 e pi o/ec t of the IGBP is ois’anized bs ICSU's Scientific Committee on Oceanic Reseat ch Its majoi t>oal is to deteimine and nuclei stand on a s’lobal scale the time sensing fluses of caibon and assoc icited bioi’emc elements m the ocean and to esaluate the 1 elated eschanc’es with the atmosplteie the sea flooi and c ontinental boundat les Tins pioject has tluee ma/oi components /) a sequence of studies to elucidate the connections between sanous biogeochemical pi oc esses and disti ibuttons 2) a global-scale smses and Ions’ tune senes of measm ements to tmpiose the basic desc 1 iption of the c cu bon cscle and 3) a modellint’ effoi t to identifs enticed piocesses and sanables, to constiuct basin and c’lobal-sc ale fields fiom obseised pen ametei s and to pi edict futuie states of the ocean The nest t’eneiation of satellites will pi os ide ocean coloui data foi the s’lobal assessment of tempoial and spatial patterns in piunais pi oductisits and the WOCE hydiot’iaphic smses will pi aside the ship oppoi utilities and ancdlais phssical and chemical data lequned to s’eneiate the f 11 st global ms entoi s of oc ean c ai bon

Another core project the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Programme (IGAC), is being designed to investigate the interactions between atmospheric chemistry and the terrestrial biosphere, particularly fluxes of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrogen oxides (4)

11 2.2 Control of Radiation by Clouds

Radiation is the primaly energy source of the climate system and the piincipal heat input to the oceans (Section 2) These lluxes arc very sensitive to the amount, distribution and optical properties of water and ice clouds (Sections 3 and 5) and are central to the problem of gieenhouse heating Aerosols also mlluence the net radiative flux at the surface The net heat flux to the ocean determines the late of ocean warming and volume expansion which is likely to be the largest contribution to the global use ol the mean sea-level during the next century if the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets aie neither gaining noi losing mass (Section 9)

(4)	The International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Programme (IGAC), a coie pioject of the IGBP, is jointly oi gantzed with ICSU's Commission on Atmosphenc Chemistiy and Global Pollution Its goal is to document and undeistand the piocesses legulating biogeochemical mtei actions between the tenestital and mat me components of the biospheie and the atmosphei e and then lole in climate It consists of seseial teseaich piojects, which addiess natuial sat lability and anthi opogenic peituibations in the composition of the atmospheie ovei teiiestila! tiopical polai, and mid-latitude iegions as well as ovei the oceans Othei teseaich ejfoits will addiess thiough obseixations and modelling the global distiibution of chemically and ladiatisely impoi taut species (including emission lates and othei piocesses goseinmg then abundances) and the /ole of these substances in cloud condensation The / esults will yield a mai ked impi os ement m out undei standing of the piocesses i esponsible foi legulatmg the abundance of atmospheiic constituents that aie of i elevance to climate

For the past two decades, the Earth radiation budget at the top of the atmosphere has been measured from satellites The most recent radiometric measurement (Earth Radiation Budget Experiment) discriminates between cloudy and cloud-free areas, thus providing direct determination of the net energetic effect of clouds in the present climate This information is not enough, however, to distinguish between the effect of different types of clouds at different altitudes The ongoing International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project of WCRP (started in 1983) is working to assemble global statistics of the distribution and properties of different cloud types In order to quantify the mterannual variability of cloud systems, ten or more years of data are required Because of the importance of changes in cloudiness in the radiation budget, these measurements must be continued Process studies will be important in the study ol feedbacks such as cloud-radiation interaction and its dependence on cloud water content, particle size and altitude

Further modelling and observational research will nevertheless be necessary to achieve accurate representation in climate models of the role of clouds and radiation The WCRP's Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX), discussed more fully in Section 112 3, has as one of its objectives the moic precise quantitative deduction ol all energy lluxes within the atmosphere and at the air-sea and an land interlaces (5)

(5)	The Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX) is a piogianime launched by the WCRP to obseise undei stand and model the hvdi ologic al c ycle and eneigy fluxes in the atmospheie on the land smface and m the uppei ocean The Piogianime will msestigate the sanations of the global hychological legime and then impact on atmosphei ic and oceanic dynamic s as well as sanations m tegional hych ologic al piocesses and watei icsouices, and then iespouse to change in the ens u eminent such as the inc lease of gi eenhouse gases The GEWEX Pi ogi amme has seseial components It mem pin ales a majoi atmosphenc modelling and analysis component lequning a substantial me lease m compute/ capabilities because climate models with high spatial lesolution cue needed to achiese icalistic simulations of legional climates GEWEX will pt os ide an oidei of magnitude impi os ement m the ability to model global pi ec ipitation and esapoiation as well as accuiate assessment of the sensitisity of the atmosphenc ladiation and clouds to climate changes Because of the complex mteiactions of clouds and ladiation the GEWEX Piogiamme will coopeiate with the TOGA Piogiamme and othei piojects m studies of cloud piocesses In addition theie will be studies to impicne the extiaction of atmosphei ic and land-suiface information ftom satellite data The GEWEX Ptogiamme also includes a senes of land smface expei intents to dexelop undei standing and paiameteinations of esapoiation and heat exchanges from inhomogeneous xegetated sin faces Adsanc ement of liydiological models and then integi ation into climate models is anothei objective of the GEWEX Piogiamme The IGBP Coie Pioject on the Biosphenc Aspects of the Hych ological Cycle (BAHC) will deal with the complementaiy ptoblem of lesolxing the nde of the biospheie and land-suiface piocesses in this context and des elop methods to implement the mtei ac tion of the biosphei e m ith the phy sic al Eai th sx stem m global models

Achieving the objectives of GEWEX will require the development of major new instruments to be flown on the next generation of multi-disciplinary satellite platforms in polar orbit or on the International Space Station and co orbiting platforms (Earth Observing System, EOS) For this reason, the mam GEWEX observing period must be timed to start with the launch of these satellite systems (expected in 1997 to 2000) The Experiment will last approximately five years and scientific interpretation and application of the results will take several luithcr years

11.2	3 Precipitation and Evaporation

The condensation of water is the main energy source of the atmospheric heat engine and the transport of water vapoui by the atmospheric circulation is a key process in the redistribution of the sun s energy in the Earth system Water vapour is also an important greenhouse gas The vertical distribution of latent heating in precipitating clouds has a large effect on the large-scale circulation of the atmosphere Precipitating clouds also play an important role in the general circulation through their effect on vertical transport of heat, moisture and momentum The inflow of fresh water at high latitudes is a major factor in determining sea water buoyancy which forces the ocean cnculation The rates of accumulation of snow and the ablation of ice in the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets are important sources of uncertainty for sea level rise dunng the next century (Section 9) Changes in the hydrological regime, precipitation and evapoiation and consequent change in soil moisture and the availability of liesh water resources, are the most serious potential consequences of impending climate change in terms of its effect on man

Unfortunately, present quantitative knowledge of the laige-scale watei budget is still very poor For example, it has not yet been possible to measure or deduce from existing measurements cither global precipitation or global evaporation (Section 7) About one third of the water run oil from continents to the ocean takes place as How in small ungauged coastal rivers or underground aquifers Much improved quantitative assessments of these components of the global water cycle aie essential to achieve accurate predictions of future water resources in a changed climate Values of precipitation and evaporation at sea can be inferred only roughly fiom general circulation models or satellite observations

To address these and the other problems mentioned in Section 112 2 WCRP has launched the GEWEX programme (5) and specific projects aimed at the collection and analysis of observations available at pi esent, such as the Global Precipitation Climatology Project (started in 1988) and the Global Run off Data Protect (1980) The Global Piccipitation Climatology Project has undertaken to combine all available ram gauge measurements and meteorological data with satellite observations ol rainclouds to produce the first global climatological record of monthly-mean total precipitation, including over the oceans These projects requne increased support by operational meteorological and hydrological agencies to upgiade the woildwide collection and exchange of essential ground-based measuiements of rain snow and river flow

An ensemble of modelling and field studies of atmosphenc and hydrological processes has already been initiated The most significant achievements towards this objective are hydrological atmosphenc field studies aiming to close the energy and water budget ol a land parcel of

size commensurate with the spatial resolution of a general circulation model A series of regional-scale (10 to 100 km) field studies (Hydrological Atmospheric Pilot Experiments, HAPEX, First ISLSCP Field Experiment and others) in diflerent major ecosystems was started in 1986 and future experiments will continue to the end of the century Cooperation between WCRP and IGBP is being pursued to take into account the role of biological processes in evapotranspiration from terrestrial vegetation and, conversely, the effect of climate change on terrestrial ecosystems Hydiological models of a continent-size nvei basin driven by daily precipitation and evaporation estimated lrom analysed meteorological fields, are now being developed and will be applied during a continentalscale project in the mid-1990s Other programmes, such as the Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment of the TOGA Programme, aie important for determining the physical processes within mesoscale convective cloud systems

11 2.4 Ocean Transport and Storage of Heat

The ocean plays a major role in the climate system through its storage and transport of heat The response time of the upper ocean is relatively short (months to years) compared to the deeper ocean It is now recognized that the largest portion of the interannual variability of the climate system is linked to the tropical oceans For this reason, the Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere (TOGA) Programme

(6)	was originated and it is maintaining an intensive observational programme lrom 1985 to 1995 In addition, the TOGA Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment (COARE) is planned for the mid-1990s, to investigate the coupling between the warm western tropical Pacific Ocean through cloud dynamics, with the high atmosphere With the TOGA observational array of buoys, current meters, and ships, it has been possible to investigate the evolution of the tiopical ocean and to initiate experimental forecasts of the El Nino phenomenon

(6) The WCRP's Tropical Ocean - Global Atmosphere (TOGA) Pi ogi amme is aimed at undei standing and esentually piedicting how the eiolution of the tiopical oceans tntei acts with and causes global-scale \at lability of the atmospheie The El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the majoi cause of inter annual \ai lability of the climate system TOGA began its obsemng peiiod m 1985 and will continue until 1995 A laige an ay of special occanogi apluc and atmosphenc measuiements base been deployed The TOGA Piogiamme also includes piocess studies and model des elopment One spec icd acti\ity is the ins c stigation of monsoon dynamic s

If the atmosphere and upper-ocean alone weie responding to the increase in greenhouse heating and the cloud-radiation feedback opeiated according to cunenl knowledge, then the surface of the Earth would already be 1 to 2°C warmer than the temperatures of the nineteenth century The response of the Earth s climate to increased greenhouse heating is being reduced by the thermal inertia of the ocean, determined by the largely unknown rate of penetration of heat into the upper 1000 metres Deep ocean warming results mainly from water sinking at high latitudes, frequently in the presence of sea ice, and subsequent circulation in the ocean Quantitative modelling of the global ocean circulation is essential to deteimine the timing of global warming The WCRP World Ocean Circulation Experiment (7) will provide the understanding and observations of the global ocean to enable the development of these ocean models

(7)	The World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) of the WCRP is a woildwtde oceanot’i aphic pi otp anime to de sei the the oceanic cue illation at all depths and on the global domain din ini’ a foe seal pei tod (1990 1995) The pi imais t>oal of WOCE is to des elop global ocean models foi the pi edic tion of c lunate c hani’e and to c ollec t data sets necessais to test those models Osei the fise seeus of the pi os’! anime theie will be an intensification of the effoit to deteimine an sea fluses t’loballs bs combinini’ men me meteoi oloi’tcal and satellite data an uppei ocean measiii ements pi os’! amme to deteimine the annual and mtei-annual oceanic 1 espouse to atmosphet ic foicutt’ and a Pios’!amme of hit’ll qualits hseboqtaphic and chemical tiacei obseisations siuface and undei watei eh iftei s cui i ent metei an ays tide t’ciut’es and satellite altimetis to deteimine the basic featmes of the deep-ocean cu dilation WOCE m ill pt os ide adequate detei mutation of t’lohal heat andfiesh watei fluses in the bulk and at the siuface of the oc ean

Three new satellite missions in support of WOCE are in the final stages of preparation or being planned

The US-French TOPEX-POSEIDON precision altimetry mission, to measure the ocean surface topography with unprecedented accuracy for the purpose of determining ocean circulation (to be launched in 1992),

The European Space Agency ERS-1 and ERS 2 missions to measure wave height and ocean surface topography, wind stiess and tempeiatuic at the surface of the ocean (to be launched in 1991 and 1994),

:	The US-Japanese ADEOS project to piovide in par-

ticular, more complete observations of the wind stress over the global ocean (to be launched in 1994)

Oceanographic agencies and institutions are joining forces to deploy the research vessel fleet needed to implement the WOCE hydrographic and geochemical surveys at sea, which call for 25 ship years The concentration of a number of chemicals and isotopes will be measured throughout the ocean By studying the distribution of substances that entered the environment at different times over the last century, geochemists and ocean modellers can estimate the time scales associated with the slow renewal and circulation of the ocean s deep water masses

WOCE systems are to be activated for five years only Maintaining systematic observations of essential ocean-ogiaphic quantities after WOCE, to monitor the changes taking place in the ocean and to define the state of the global ocean circulation from which further dynamical predictions could be made, is a requirement which remains to be put into effect (Section 113 2)

11.2.5	Ecosystem Processes

As indicated above, both terrestrial and marine ecosystems are important as sources and sinks of biogenic gases that have radiative properties in the atmosphere In addition, terrestrial ecosystems play an important role in the exchange of moisture and therefore energy between the land surface and overlying atmosphere Thus predictions of climate, driven by anthropogenic increases in the atmospheric content of greenhouse gases must take into consideration the likelihood that feedback from ecosystems will be altered by climate change itself Tempoial and spatial patteins in temperature, precipitation and nutrient deposition (including extreme events) will directly affect soils, plant productivity, vegetation structuie and community composition This influence is not limited to natural ecosystems, it also imposes regional constiaints on agriculture and forestry Large scale displacement of particular ecosystems will affect the climate system by altenng local surface roughness and albedo

A more quantitative understanding of the function of ecosystems in climate is important In particular research is needed to provide better global observations of the nature and extent of vegetation and soils In addition in situ studies must be scaled up to investigate the physiological and ecological processes that configure an ecosystem response to climate change The intei prctation of such data lequires a modelling appioach that also includes the ability of community constituents to migrate away from a unsuitable climate regime The full use of this inhumation in climate predictions requires higher icsolution models (50 km) capable of simulating extieme conditions

and the full range of the seasonal cycle The IGBP is engaged in planning new studies of climate and land use changes on ecosystems, and their attendant feedbacks on climate Partly to address these ecosystem dimensions of climate regulation, the IGBP has established a core project on Global Change and Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) (8)

(8)	Global Change and Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) is a coie pioject of the IGBP, aimed at developing the capacity to piedict the effects of changes in climate atmospheiic composition and land-use piactices on tenestnal ecosystems This capacity is lequned both because the ecosystem changes aie of duect impoitance to humans, and because they vs ill hase a feedback effect on fuithei evapotianspuation, albedo and suiface toughness The pioject has two mam foci Ecosystem "Physiology" the exchanges of eneigy and mateiials, and then distiibution and stoiage - and Ecosystem Stiuctuie - the changes m species (functional type) composition and physiognomic stiuctuie, on the patch, landscape and legional (continental) scales The pioject is based on close mtegiation of espei/mentation and modelling It consists of sesen coie actisities, each of which is made up of a numbei of pai tic ulai tasks, which include such topics as eleccited CO2 effects on ecosystem functioning changes in the biogeochemical cycling of C, N P and S, soil dynamics segetation dynamics and changes m spatial patterns

11.3	Requirements for Narrowing Uncertainties in Future Climate Change

Climate research can provide a valuable service to society by providing the means for detection of future climate change, quantitative prediction of the timing and rate of the expected global changes and assessments of probable regional effects In order to achieve these goals, it is necessary to develop a comprehensive Global Earth Observing System, to develop improved climate models and to acquire new scientific knowledge As shown in Figure 111, there is an essential symbiosis between observations and modelling Observations are required for long-term climate monitoring, especially for detection of climate change, and for local process studies Modelling is required to support process studies as well as to provide the vehicle for climate predictions Observations and modelling are brought together to develop an understanding of the components of the climate system At present modelling and data assimilation studies are limited by availability of computer time large increases in computer resources are a majoi icquirement A second major limitation on the advancement oi climate research is the shortage of highly trained scientists

PROCESS STUDIES

UNDERSTANDING

MODELLING

PROCESS

MODELS

GLOBAL

SMULAT ON

FELD

EXPTS

LONG

TERM

MONITOR ING

N SITU & SPACE

OBSERVATIONS

DETECTION * OF

CLIMATE

CHANGE

PREDICTION

* OF

* CLIMATE

CHANGE

Figure 11.1: The symbiosis between observations and modelling

11.3.1	Improvement of the Global Atmosphere and Land Surfaces Observing System

Basic information on climatic processes, climate variations and systematic trends originates from the operational meteorological observing systems of the World Weather Watch, complemented by various operational hydrological networks and environmental measurements of the Global Atmospheric Watch (9) In addition to the maintenance of the basic meteorological systems, specific improvements are needed, in particular

a)	improved infrared and microwave atmospheric sounding instruments on meteorological satellites, to obtain more accurate temperature/moisture information with better vertical resolution in the troposphere (e g , high spectral resolution infrared spectrometer/radiometer),

b)	improved tropospheric wind observations from geostationary satellites (cloud-drift winds) and platforms in low Earth-orbit (Doppler wind lidar),

c)	rain-radars and passive multiple-frequency imaging radiometers in the microwave spectrum, to estimate rainfall over the whole globe, and

d)	radiometers to determine more accurately the Earth's radiation budget

Temporal and spatial patterns in key vegetation properties can, when calibrated and interpreted in the context of ground-truth data, be efficiently studied with satellite sensors These data are critical in detecting regional shifts in ecosystem form and function in response to climate and land use changes Sustaining these activities at levels appropriate to the study of climate change requires

(9)	Sexeial international oi ganizations operate major obser vational netxx oi k s that pi ox ide infoi nation that needs to be included in a < ompi ehensix e system for climate monitoring Foi climate monitoring purposes it is essential that each of these networks be maintained and where appi opr late, enhanced The important c liar actei istic s of climate monitoring systems include long-term continuity consistency of cahbiation quality contiol documentation of techniques, and mtei national axailabihty of data The majoi netwoi ks ai e the Wen Id Weathei Watc h and Global Atmospheie Watch of WMO the Integiated Global Ocean Sei vices System of WMO and the Inter goy ei nmental Oceanographic Commission the Global Enxuonmental Monitor mg System of UNEP and the Global Sea-Lex el Sei vice of IOC

e)	improved commitment to the acquisition and archival of AVHRR data for determining rates of change (for example, those arising from desertification and land clearing), shifts in seasonal vegetation cycles, and rates of plant production needed for carbon cycling modelling, and

f)	improved high spectral resolution sensors, like those being defined for EOS, to determine vegetation characteristics (including physical and chemical properties) needed as input for global biogeochemical models

11.3.2	Development of a Global Ocean and Ice Observing System

From the perspective of global climate change, systematic ongoing observations ol the global ocean are needed tor several purposes The key to predicting the rate of change of the global system is to be found in observations of the ocean circulation and heat storage Predictions of future climate change will eventually be carried out starting from the observed state of the combined atmosphere and ocean system An example of this approach is the forecast of El Nino and other tropical climate disturbances by the WCRP Tropical Ocean and Global Atmosphere (TOGA) Programme

A comprehensive ocean and ice observing system requires

a)	satellite observations of the ocean surlace temperature, wind and topography sea ice concentration and chlorophyll content (ocean colour), and of the topography of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets, by an international array of space platforms in suitable orbits around the Earth

b)	an international operational upper-ocean monitoring programme, to determine the time and space dependent distribution of heat and fresh water in upper ocean layers, seasonal variations and long-term trends, and

c)	an international progiamme of systematic sea-level and deep-ocean measurements, at suitable time and space intervals, to determine the state oi the ocean circulation, ocean volume and transport of heat

11.3.3	Establishment of a Comprehensive System for Climate Monitoring

In the previous two sections (113 1 and 113 2) improvements to the global atmosphere and land suifacc observing system and development of a global ocean and ice observing system were discussed These observing systems must be coupled with existing observing systems to establish a comprehensive system lot climate monitoring It must be recognized that the requnemcnts for climate monitoring are different from those for weather prediction Failure to recognize this in the past means that there arc a number of unceitamties which have been introduced into long-term climatological time series A long-term commitment is now needed by the world s national weather services to monitor climate vanations and change Changes and improvements in observational networks should be introduced in a way which will lead to continuous, consistent long-term data sets sufficiently accurate to document changes and variations in climate (9) Some observing systems have and will be established lor research purposes These research systems are usually of limited duiation and area and may have diffeient emphases from a climate monitoring system (Figure 11 1) Howevei it is important that these observations also be integiated with the information horn long-teim momtonng systems

Satellite observations are not yet ol long enough duration to document climate variations In order for these data to be most useful, it is veiy important that the> be analysed and interpreted with existing m situ data High pnonty should be given to the blending oi integiation of spaced-based and in situ data sets in such a way as to build upon the strengths of each type of data Examples oi ongoing projects that have used mixed satellite data sets caieful cross calibration and coordinated data processing to produce global data sets arc the WCRPs International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) and the Global Piecipitation Climatology Project (GPCP) Foi some applications it is necessary to assimilate the obscivations into opeiational numcncal weathei prediction models for which purpose the observations need to be available in near ical time All satellite mstiumcnts should be calibrated both pnoi to launch and in flight For those instruments now in operation techniques should be developed to prevent or detect instrument dnlt In planning

new satellite observations for long-teim monitoring, special attention should be paid to continuity of calibration and processing, archival and access to the data

It is, furthei, imperative that there be strengthened international agreements and procedures tor international exchange of existing basic climatological data (e g , raingauge measurements and/or meteorological satellite data) National data centres must make available, through free exchange, to the world climate community, data sets collected in their countries Existing CLIMAT and international data exchange (World Weather Records) must include essential variables which aie absent at present For most climate variables, the spatial and temporal lesolution ot the exchanged data is inadequate, precluding world-wide analyses of extremes New methods ot international exchange may be needed For a worldwide ocean monitoring system there are requirements for streng thening international agreements to facilitate standard temperature, salinity and velocity measurements by all vessels and oceanographic drifting platforms within national Exclusive Economic Zones Agreements among scientists and lesearch institutions for international sharing of oceanographic data need to be strengthened

There remains considerable data in manuscript form, which will prove valuable in producing more definitive analyses of climate change and variability These data should be documented in computer compatible form These and proxy data, including palaeo climate data, are needed to rcconstiuct variations in past climates In many cases, spatial and temporal resolution needs to be improved Palaeodata can be particularly valuable in testing hypotheses regarding the mechanisms that have in the past linked physical and biogeochemical aspects of climate change The IGBP has established a core project spec-dically loi studying Past Global Changes (PAGES) (10)

The WMO has undertaken to strengthen its activities to monitoi the chemical composition and other characteristics ol the atmosphere, away lrom pollution sources, and to mcoiporatc these activities into a coordinated Global Atmospheie Watch (GAW) piogramme The main objective of GAW is to establish a global monitoring nelwoik of about 20 observatoi les complemented by regional stations whenever possible

In addition to the above-mentioned needs to improve available mstiuments and methods to observe various climate parameter the development of a comptehensive system for monitoring climate change around the world is likely to be required under a convention on climate change Thcie aie many international bodies involved in already existing monitoring activities such as the Woild Climate Research Programme the Woild Climate Piogiamme the WMO Commission foi Climatology the Global Atmosphere Watch the UNESCO Man and Biospheie the Intergovernmental Oceanogiaphic Commission and the

(10)	The IGBP coie pioject on Past Global Changes (PAGES) cooi dinates and integiates existing national and international palaeo pio/ects and implements new activities in oidei to obtain mfoi mation on the pie-mdustiial xaiiations of the Eaith system and the baseline on which human impacts aie supei imposed Typical leseaich tasks aie the sepaiation of anthi opogenic and coi i esponding /espouses and the documentation of possible intei nails fenced pi oc esses Ofpaiticulai imeiest aie the deconvolution of long-teim climatic changes oxei a glacial cycle of ecosystems to the w aiming at the end of the last glaciation and changes in the atmosphei ic content of CC>2 and CH4 thi oughout the last glacial cycle and dui ing pei tods of abi upt climatic c hange All this mfoi mation m ill help to evaluate both climatic and biogeochemical cycle models

UNEP Global Environmental Monitoring System The future overall system for monitoring climate change and its effects requires coordination of activities of these and other organizations

11.3.4	Development of Climate Models

Improved prediction of climate change depends on the development of climate models, which is the objective of the climate modelling programme of the WCRP Atmospheric general circulation models are based on numerical models used with considerable success by the national weather services to predict weather several days ahead However, when adapted for climate prediction, these models need to be extended in several ways, all of which place heavy demands on computer resources Extending the period of integration from days to decades has already been achieved, but so far only at the expense of poor spatial resolution and/or inadequate representation of the interaction between the atmosphere and the oceans In addition, some feedback mechanisms in the climate system depend on biological chemical interactions, the propei understanding ot which aie key tasks for the IGBP

The oceans are represented in most climate models in a very simplified way that docs not properly simulate the ocean s ability to absorb heat and hence retard (and to some extent alter the pattein ol) global warming These (so-called equilibrium) models provide an estimate of eventual climate changes but not the rate at which these will take place In ordei to predict the evolution of climate realistically, it is neccssaiy to develop luither a new generation of models in which the atmosphere and oceans (and sea-ice) are fully coupled and in which the circulation ol the oceans as well as the atmosphere is explicitly

computed The oceans have important eddies occurring on small scales and fine spatial resolution is essential for their explicit representation in a realistic manner

Finer resolution than used at present is also required for the atmospheric component if regional variations of climate are to be predicted Present day climate models do not have sufficient resolution to represent in a meaningful way the climate of specific regions as small as, for example, the majority of individual nations The implementation of finer resolution models will require significant advances in computer capability such as can be expected within the next 5 to 10 years Improved parameterization of cloud and other processes will also need to be incorporated To develop these parameterizations, very-fine mesh models will need to be developed, covering domains large enough to embrace entire mesoscale convective cloud systems, and appropriate field experiments will need to be carried out in different regions to provide input data and validation

Models are required not only for prediction and process studies, but also for analysing the inevitably incomplete observational data sets to reconstruct and monitor climate change Appropriate 4-dimensional data assimilation techniques exist for observations of atmospheric temperature and wind, but substantial improvements over the course of the next decade are needed to extend these methods for assimilating other parameters such as precipitation Similar techniques will also be required for the analysis of ocean observations

The development of advanced geosphere-biosphere models will be an important task lor the IGBP Such models are needed to introduce, as dynamic variables, the biological source and sink terms into descriptions of the way in which greenhouse gases will vary with climate change That will become feasible with supercomputers available early in the 21st century Such models will simulate detailed events with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution to permit explicit treatment of the strong non-linear interactions between physics, chemistiy and biology that occur on small scales

Model validation is a prerequisite to reducing uncertainties The interaction between observational data and numerical modelling is a continuing process It is essential for the development and testing of these models, for their operation and for their validation and eventual application to prediction Confidence in models depend on comparisons with observations Modellers must identify data sets needed, their temporal and spatial scales of measurement and the required accuracy and simultaneity of observations The observational system must be designed to provide such measurements and the data analysis and information system must be able to transform these measurements into usable parameteis

11.3.5	International Research on Climate and Global Change

Carrying out this global multi-disciplinary progiamine requires unprecedented co-operation of the world scientilic community and task sharing by reseaich institutions and responsible national administrations with long-term commitments of support Inasmuch as global climate change is recognized as a problem concerning all nations establishing an effective global climate monitoring and prediction system must also be recognized as a responsibility to be shared by all nations For the physical aspects of the climate system, reseaich on the clouds and radiation, the global water cycle and the oceans should be given highest priority at this time Within the Woild Climate Research Programme, this includes the Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX) and World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) Resouice commitments are required as a matter of urgency Regaiding biogeochemical aspects of the climate system, leseaich on the role of the ocean and the terrestrial biosphcie as sources and sinks of greenhouse gases should be given highest priority Within the International Geospheie-Biosphere Programme, this includes the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) and the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Programme (IGAC) Internationally coordinated lesearch on the role of ecosystems in climate, including a biospheric contribution to GEWEX through an IGBP core project on BAHC, is now being organized These studies will be an obvious complement to climate studies and be important in laying the sound foundation for assessing the effects of climate change on ecosystem functions and subsequent feedbacks to the climate system

As noted earlier, there are strong interactions between climate change and other global environmental issues A research programme on climate change will provide valuable insight into these issues and as we gain understanding of the functioning of the total Earth system research programmes will need to be modified and reframed in terms of a research programme aimed at supporting global environmental management in all its aspects

It is recognized that there are important scientific questions that are being addressed by national and other research programmes independently of these international programmes The emphasis in this report has been given to those scientific questions that require large experimental and observing systems, and therefore require international coordination of efforts

11.3.6	Time-scales for Narrowing the Uncertainty

New concepts and scientific methods cannot matuic overnight and the lead time for significant progress in knowledge must be estimated in terms of yeais or even a decade, as for any major new technical development

Although progress will occur incrementally in all fields, it is instructive to identify times when the pace of progress will be intensified as a result of specific activities some of which are shown for illustrative purposes in Figure 11.2. Where the oceans are concerned, substantial advances can be expected after the mid-1990s as a result of the WOCE and JGOFS field programmes. On the same time scale, model developments will lead to better treatment of the oceans in coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation models and hence to more realistic predictions of the rale of change of climate. For the atmosphere, clouds introduce the greatest uncertainty: some progress will occur during the 1990s as a result of the ISCCP and continued Earth radiation measurements from space. The Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment, to start in the late 1990s, will provide the first comprehensive data set for marked improvement in the treatment of clouds and radiation in climate models. A proper treatment of clouds may require the development of more powerful satellite instruments such as three-dimensional cloud radars after the turn of the century. A similar time scale applies to the representation of precipitation and evaporation, and associated transport processes. The scries of HAPEXs will continue through the mid-1990s and the Continental Scale Study of a large

river basin will follow. Advanced space instruments (Figure 11.3) involving a heavy investment in active sensors (lasers and radars) will begin producing important results at the end of the 1990s as part of the GEWEX. This is also the time when we shall begin to see global models incorporating chemical and biospheric aspects and advanced four-dimensional data assimilation techniques Improved understanding of the sources and sinks of the major greenhouse gases will only come following completion of JGOFS (for the marine component) and IGAC (for the terrestrial component and the atmospheric transformations) at the end of the century. Although still lacking some of these improvements, a major advance in the ability to predict the regional differences in climate change is expected to take place in the late 1990s, with the implementation of higher resolution models of the atmosphere. A broad summary of the time-scales for nano wing the uncertainties is given in Figure 11.4.

REPRESENTATIVE OBSERVATIONS

ATM. RADIATION 4 CUMATE :	ATM. DYNAMICS & CLIMATE	i OCEAN PRODUCTIVITY i, OCEAN DYNAMICS

Sea surface temperature/ topography, sea ice, polar ice sheet thickness, ocean wave height/ wind speed, wind speed direction at air-sea interface

Ocean color, primary ocean productivity & variability

Atmospheric temperature, humidity, water vapor profiles;

precipitation rates;

tropospheric winds

Radiation budget, cloud data, solar irradiance

SeaWips

.. .......

; TOPEX POSEIDON

ERS 1/2

NOAA

TRMM

&

UARS



ADEOS

EPOP

EOS

Figure 11.3: (Continued)

TIMESCALES FOR NARROWING UNCERTAINTIES

For these objectives to be met a long term commitment to observation and modelling activities must be maintained for at least the next decade. It is essential that government funding agencies recognize the magnitude of both the financial and human resources needed to undertake this research programme and the need to plan for appropriately long and sustained scientific efforts. Understanding and predicting the Earth's climate system must surely be the greatest scientific challenge yet to be faced by humankind. It is a worthy banner behind which the nations of the world can unite.

ANNEX

Climatic consequences of emissions

Model calculations contributed by:

C. Bruhl; E. Byutner; R.G. Derwent; I. Enting; J. Goudriaan; K. Hasselmann; M. Heimann; I. Isaksen; C. Johnson; I. Karol; D. Kinnison; A. Kiselev; K. Kutz; T-H. Peng; M. Prather; S.C.B. Raper; K.P. Shine; U. Siegenthaler; F. Stordal;

A. Thompson; D. Tirpak; R.A. Warrick; T.M.L. Wigley; DJ. Wuebbles.

Co-ordinators:

G.J. Jenkins; R.G. Derwent.

A.l Introduction

Modelling studies have been undertaken by a number of research groups to investigate the climate consequences of several man-made emission scenarios The first category of emission scenarios is that generated by IPCC Working Group III, which represents a broad range of possible controls to limit the emissions of greenhouse gases, these we refer to as policy scenarios. The second category of scenarios is generated by Working Group I to illustrate the way in which the atmosphere and climate would respond to changes in emissions, these we refer to as science scenarios. Many of the results have already been displayed in the appropriate sections of this report, they are brought together here to allow the complete emissions-climate pathway to be seen The exploration of the climate consequences of both categories of emissions scenarios involved the sequence of modelling studies illustrated in Figure A 1

A.1.1 Policy Scenarios

Four policy scenarios have been developed by Working Group III, they are described in Appendix 1 of this report

Figure A.l: Sequence of modelling studies

YEAR

Figure A.2(a): Emissions of carbon dioxide (as an example) in the four policy scenarios generated by IPCC Working Group III

YEAR

Figure A.2(b): Emissions of methane (as an example) in the foui policy scenarios generated by IPCC Working Group III

The first approximates to a Business-as-Usual (BaU) case The other three incorporate a progressive penetration ol controls on greenhouse gas emissions, and in this report arc labelled Scenario B, C and D (The BaU case had earhei been referred to as Scenario A)

Each scenario includes emissions of the main greenhouse gases, and other gases (such as NOx and CO) which influence then concentrations The emissions ol carbon dioxide and methane are shown in Figure A 2 as examples For further information on the background to and method of generation of, these policy scenarios, sec Expert Group on Emissions Scenarios (1990)

A. 1.2 Science Scenarios

The chain of processes in the atmosphere and other components ol the climate system which lead from emissions to climate change (typified in this case by global temperature and sea level rise) can be illustrated by using a

small number of cases where emissions are changed in some hypothetical manner, often exaggerated for clarity The following science scenarios were selected by Woiking Group 1 changes described apply equally to all the greenhouse gases

51	Constant emissions at 1990 levels of all gases from 1990 onwards,

52	Reduce all emissions by 50% in 1990, and hold constant thereafter,

53	Deci ease emissions at 2% per year compound from 1990,

54	Inciease emissions at 2% per year compound until 2010, then decrease at 2% per year compound

In each case the 1990 emissions arc assumed to be those given in the Business-as-Usual policy scenario

A.2 Pre-1990 Greenhouse Gas Concentrations

Concentrations of the greenhouse gases prior to 1989 are taken as those observed directly in the atmosphere or in ice-cores as discussed in Section 1 The yeai 1765 was chosen as the pie-industrial baseline for greenhouse gas concentiations (and, hence, for man made forcing and global mean temperature) 1990 concentrations were calculated by making a small extrapolation from most recent observations and trends

A.3 Future Greenhouse Gas Concentrations

A numbei of models which contain representations of atmosphenc chemistry and the carbon cycle have been used to make piojections oi future atmosphenc concentrations of the gieenhousc gases irom the man-made emissions sccnauos The lesults Irom each of the models aie not shown explicitly For each scenano and gas a single bestestimate was made ol the concentration projection and these aie shown in Figuie A 3 for the policy scenarios and A 4 A 5 1 oi the science scenarios In most cases these best estimates were simple means of a numbei oi model lesults

A quantitative understanding ol the 1 elationship between trace gas emissions and tropospheric concentrations requnes a description in three dimensions of atmosphenc dynamics atmospheric chemistry and souices and sinks The problem is complex and demands the use of huge supeicomputcis Hence the lesults descnbcd in this Annex have been obtained with models which contain a numbei of simplify mg assumptions The models give a lange of luture concentiations depending on the assumptions adopted Tioposphcnc models together with their lepiesentations ol

atmospheric tianspoit and chemistry have not been subject to comparison and evaluation in the same manner as the stratospheric assessment models Consequently, there are no favouied appioaches or recommended models

In many cases companson of different model results reveal many shortcomings in the emissions scenarios themselves Each emission scenario starts from 1985 and extends to 2100 Much is known about trace gas sources and sinks from these and other modelling studies of the 1985 atmosphere The current emissions provided by Working Group III (WGIII) have not always been harmonised with picvious model studies of the life cycles of these trace gases Each set of model studies has therefore been adjusted in some way to accommodate the 1985 situation where the emissions are in some way inadequate

Emissions of some gases in particular man-made and natural hydrocarbons were not projected by WGIII, each modelling gioup has therclorc made its own assumptions about these and this is an additional cause of differences between model lesults

In the case of nitrous oxide its atmospheric burden and its rate of increase have been well established from observations and the models have been set up to reproduce these obseivations The lifetime calculated within each model detcimines the 1985 emissions required to support the current atmospheric burden and its rate of increase There is a nanow range of emissions which satisfies this balance and it is model dependent, the WGIII emissions do not in general fall within this range, and modelling groups have therefore adopted one of two approaches to correct for this

The WGIII emissions taken together with current atmospheric concentration and its rate of increase, yield a lifetime of 167 years, somewhat longer than that generally accepted (see Section 1 5) Models with shorter lifetimes than 167 years will not reproduce current rate of increase of concentration, and some modellers have added further nitrous oxide emissions in ordei to accommodate this, this has led to a diveigence between model results

The 1985 atmospheric concentration of methane is well known, and its rate of increase shows that souices and sinks are not curiently in balance Not all aspects of these methane souices have yet been adequately quantified, neither has the sink through its reaction with OH Whilst the accuracies in sources and sinks are adequate in budget studies to confirm that tropospheric OH can indeed account for the observed methane behaviour, the lack of accuracy has led to pioblcms in the concentration calculations desci i bed here

The atmospheric burden of methane and its rate of inciease have been well established from observations and the models have been set up to reproduce them The OH radical conccnliation distribution calculated within each model determines the 1985 emissions requited to support

CFC-12 CONCENTRATION (pptv)	N2O CONCENTRATION (ppbv)	CO2 CONCENTRATION (ppmv)

YEAR

Figure A.3: Concentrations of the main man

scenarios

YEAR

made greenhouse gases resulting from the four IPCC WGIII "policy

emissions

> n

Q.

Q.

z o

>-

< cr

2000

400

500

YEAR 2060 2080 2100

300	.	,	__,

1980 2000 2020 ’ 2040

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100

YEAR

400

YEAR	o

Figure A.5: Concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and CFC-12 resulting from (a) decreasing emissions by p

from 1990, and (b) increasing emissions by 2%pa until 2010, followed by decreasing emissions at 2%pa

the current atmospheric burden and its rate of increase There is a narrow, model dependent, range of methane, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen emissions which satisfies this balance The 1985 emissions provided in the scenarios do not fall within the required range of all the models, and modellers have therefore adopted one of two approaches, causing the part of divergence in model results Some models have used the methane, carbon monoxide and NOX emission scenarios exactly as provided and scaled up all their results to make the 1985 methane concentrations agree with observations Other models have added extra methane, carbon monoxide or NOX to make the 1985 methane concentrations agree with observations and maintained the extra injection throughout each calculation

Differences in results can also arise because each model calculates a different scenario- and time-dependent tropospheric OH distribution One model includes a feedback between composition changes to temperature changes to relative humidity changes back to OH radical concentrations Almost all the models include the complex interaction between the future methane, carbon monoxide, ozone and nitrogen oxides concentrations on future OH radical concentrations

CFCs 11 and 12 both have well quantified sources and stratospheric photolytic sinks The relatively small differences between model calculations is due to differences in model transport and assumed or calculated atmospheric lifetimes Such differences are similar to those reported in stratospheric ozone assessments (e g , WMO, 1989)

Although HCFC-22 sources are also all man-made its lifetime is determined not by stratospheric photolysis but by tropospheric OH oxidation However, the temperature dependence of the oxidation ieaction is so large that virtually all of the atmospheric removal occurs in low latitudes in the lower region of the troposphere and in the upper stratosphere The models used for this assessment generally have different 1985 tropospheric OH radical distributions and the different model loimulations lead to different future OH distributions depending on the methane, carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxide emissions In addition, one of the models employed includes an additional feedback whereby futuic global warming leads to increased humidities and hence increased tropospheric OH radical concentrations Longer lifetimes imply greater tropospheric build-up of HCFC-22 by the year 2100

Several modelling groups calculated future concentrations of tropospheric and stratospheric ozone, but because there was a wide divergence in the results, and because the relationship between concentration and forcing is not well established, the elfects of ozone have not yet been included in the climate response

A.4 Past and Future Radiative Forcing

The relationships between atmospheric concentration and radiative forcing derived in Section 2 were applied to the concentration histones of the greenhouse gases described

Figure A.6: Radiattve forcing calculated from the four policy emissions scenarios

Figure A.7: Radiative forcing calculated to arise from continuing emissions of all man made greenhouse gases at 100% of 1990 levels and 50% of 1990 levels

above, and to the estimates of future concentrations from the four policy scenarios. The combined historical and future radiative forcing is illustrated for the four policy scenarios in Figure A.6, and those from the science scenarios in Figures A.7 and A.8.

A.5 Estimates of Future Global Mean Temperature

Ideally, the complete climate effects of the emission scenarios would be investigated using a comprehensive coupled atmosphere-ocean General Circulation Model, the results from which (using simple concentration increases) have been discussed in Section 6.4. Such model runs are prohibitively expensive and time consuming. Instead, estimates of the change in global mean surface air temperature due to man-made forcing (both historical and projected) were made using a box-diffusion-upwelling model of the type discussed in Section 6.6.

These models have a number of prescribed parameters (mixed-layer depth, upwelling rate, etc.) which are set to the optimum values discussed in Section 6. For each scenario, three values of climate sensitivity (the equilibrium temperature rise due to a doubling of carbon dioxide concentrations) are employed, as described in Section 5; 1.5°C, 2.5°C and 4.5°C. Results are given for each of these climate sensitivities, indicated as "high", "best estimate" and "low" in the figures.

Temperature rise estimates for the four policy scenarios are shown in Figure A.9, and those from the science scenarios are given in Figure A. 10 and A. 11 (best-estimate values only).

YEAR

Figure A.10: Temperature rise calculated from continuing emissions of all man-made greenhouse gases at 100% of 1990 levels and 50% of 1990 levels.

1980	2000	2020	2040	2060	2080	2100

YEAR

YEAR

Figure A.9: Temperature rise calculated using a box-diffusion-upwelling model, due to the four IPCC WGIII "policy" emissions scenarios. Only the best-estimate value (corresponding to a climate sensitivity of 2.5°C) is shown.

Figure A.ll: Temperature rise calculated from (a) decreasing emissions of all man-made greenhouse gases by 2% pa from 1990, and (b) increasing emissions of all gases by 2%pa until 2010, followed by decreasing emissions at 2%pa.

A.6 Estimates of Future Global Mean Sea Level Rise

Box diffusion models are also used to estimate the sea level rise from the forcing projections; the thermal expansion part of future sea level rise is calculated directly by these models. The models also contain expressions for the contributions to sea level change from glacier and land ice melting, and changes in the mass-balance of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets.

Sea level changes estimated from the four policy scenarios are shown in Figure A. 12, and for the science scenarios in Figure A. 13 and A. 14. Again, "high”, "bestestimate" and "low" curves are shown for the policy scenarios, corresponding to the same climate sensitivities as used in the temperature rise estimates.

YEAR

A.7 Emissions to Sea Level Rise Pathway for Science Scenarios

In order to illustrate the timescales for adjustment of the climate to changes in emissions, the full pathway between emission change, through concentration change (using carbon dioxide as an example), radiative forcing, temperature rise and sea level rise is illustrated for each of the science scenarios in Figures A 15 to A 18

Figure A.12: Sea level rise due to the four IPCC WGIII' policy” emissions scenarios Only the best-estimate value (corresponding to a climate sensitivity of 2 5°C) is shown

YEAR

References

Expert Group on Emissions Scenarios, IPCC Working Group III, Draft Report on Emissions Scenarios, February 1990

WMO, 1989 Scientific Assessment of stratospheric ozone 1989, Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project, Report 20, Geneva

Figure A.13: Sea level rise calculated from continuing emissions of all man-made greenhouse gases at 100% of 1990 levels and 50% of 1990 levels

40

E o

ui

<2

ct

u

>

HI

< ui <n

30

20

10

_	-2%pa from	.  2010		
-		
		-2%pa from '
	/ / // //	1990	.

0

1980	2000	2020	2040	2060	2080	2100

YEAR

SEA LEVEL RISE (cm)	TEMEPRATURE RISE (°C)	RADIATIVE FORCING (W/m**2) COZ CONCENTRATION (ppmv) EMISSIONS (% of 1990)

CO2

CH4 CFC12 CFC11 N2O

YEAR

YEAR

Figure A.15: The complete emissions- sea level rise pathway shown in the case of continuing emissions at 1990 levels.

Figure A.16: The complete emissions- sea level rise pathway shown for emissions continuing at 50% of 1990 levels.

	< 2% pa REDUCTION FROM 1990	-
-		-
-		-
-		-
•		•
•		

120

40

YEAR

1980 2000	2020 2040 2060	2080 2100

YEAR

Figure A.17: The complete emissions- sea level rise pathway shown due to decreasing emissions of all man-made greenhouse gases by 2%pa from 1990

Appendix 1

EMISSIONS SCENARIOS FROM THE RESPONSE STRATEGIES WORKING GROUP OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

The Steering Group of the Response Strategies Working Group (Working Group III) requested the USA and The Netherlands to develop emissions scenarios for evaluation by the IPCC Working Group I The scenarios cover the emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), chlorol luorocarbons (CFCs), carbon monoxide (CO) and nitrogen oxides (NOX) irom present up to the year 2100 Growth of the economy and population was taken as common tor all scenarios Population was assumed to approach 10 5 billion in the second half of the next century Economic growth was assumed to be 2-3% annually in the coming decade in the OECD countries and 3-5 % in the Eastern Euiopean and developing countries The economic growth levels were assumed to decrease thereafter In order to icach the requned targets, levels of technological development and envnonmcntal controls were varied

In the Business-as-Usual Scenario (Scenario A) the energy supply is coal intensive and on the demand side only modest efficiency increases are achieved Carbon monoxide controls are modest, deforestation continues until the tropical forests are depleted and agricultural emissions of methane and nitrous oxide are uncontrolled

For CFCs the Montreal Protocol is implemented albeit with only partial participation Note that the aggregation of national projections by IPCC Working Group III gives higher emissions (10-20%) of carbon dioxide and methane by 2025

In Scenario B the energy supply mix shifts towards lower carbon fuels, notably natural gas Large efficiency increases are achieved Caibon monoxide contiols aic stringent, deforestation is icvciscd and the Montreal Protocol implemented with full participation

In Scenario C a shift towards renewables and nuclcai energy takes place in the second half of next centuiy CFCs are now phased out and agricultuial emissions limited

For Scenario D a shift to renewables and nuclcai in the first half of the next century leduccs the emissions of carbon dioxide initially more or less stabilizing emissions in the industrialized countries The scenario shows that stringent controls in industrialized countries combined with moderated growth of emissions in developing countries could stabilize atmospheric concentrations Carbon dioxide emissions are reduced to 50% of 1985 levels by the middle of the next century

Appendix 2

ORGANISATION OF IPCC AND WORKING GROUP I

IPCC:

Chairman:	Professor B. Bolin (Sweden)
Vice Chairman:	Dr A. Al Gain (Saudi Arabia)
Rapporteur:	Dr J. A. Adejokun (Nigeria)
Secretary:	Dr N. Sundararaman (WMO)

Working Group I:

Chairman:	Dr J.T. Houghton (United Kingdom)
Vice Chairmen:	Dr M. Seek (Senegal) DrA.D. Moura (Brazil)

Core Team at the UK Meteorological Office:

Co-ordinator:	Dr G.J. Jenkins
Technical Editor:	Mr J.J .Ephraums
Assistant Technical Editor:	Miss S.K. Varney
Computing:	Mrs A. Foreman
Sub-Editor:	Mr A. Gilchrist
Visiting Scientists:	Dr R.T. Watson (NASA, USA)  Dr R.J. Haarsma (KNMI, Netherlands) Prof H-X. Cao (SMA.PRC)  Dr T. Callaghan (NERC, UK)

Appendix 3

CONTRIBUTORS TO IPCC WG1 REPORT

SECTION 1

Lead Authors:	
R .T. Watson	NASA Headquarters, USA
H. Rodhe	University of Stockholm, Sweden
H. Oeschger	Physics Institute, University of Bern, Switzerland
U. Siegenthaler	Physics Institute, University of Bern, Switzerland
Contributors:	
M. Andreae	Max Planck Institute fur Chemie, FRG
R. Charlson	University of Washington, USA
R. Cicerone	University of California, USA
J. Coakley	Oregon State University, USA
R. G. Derwent	Harwell Laboratory, UK
J. Elkins	NOAA Environmental Research Laboratories, USA
F. Fehsenfeld	NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, USA
P. Fraser	CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia
R. Gammon	University of Washington, USA
H. Grassl	Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, FRG
R. Harriss	University of New Hampshire, USA
M. Heimann	Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, FRG
R.A. Houghton	Woods Hole Research Centre, USA
V. Kirchhoff	Atmospheric and Space Science, INEP, Brazil
G. Kohlmaier	Institut fur Physikalische und Theoretisch Chemie, FRG
S. Lal	Physical Research Laboratory, India
P. Liss	University of East Anglia, UK
J. Logan	Harvard University, USA
R.J. Luxmoore	Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA
L. Merlivat	University of Pans, France
K. Minami	National Institute of Agro-Environmental Sciences, Japan
G. Pearman	CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia
S. Penkett	University of East Anglia, UK
D. Raynaud	Laboratoire de Glaciologie et Geophysique de l'Environment, CNRS, France
E. Sanhueza	Max Planck Institute fur Chemie, FRG
P. Simon	Institute foi Space Aeronomy, Belgium
W. Su	Research Centie for Eco-Environmental Science, Academy of Sciences, China
B. Svensson	University of Agricultural Sciences, Sweden

A. Thompson

P. Vitousek

M.	Whitfield

P. Winkler

S. Wofsy

SECTION 2

Lead Authors:

K.P. Shine

R.G. Derwent

D.J. Wuebbles J-J. Morcrette

Contributors:

A.J. Apling

J.P. Blanchet

R. Charlson

D. Crommelynck

H.	Grassl

N.	Husson

G.	J. Jenkins

I.	Karol

M.D. King

V. Ramanathan

H.	Rodhe

G.	Thomas

G-Y Shi

T. Yamanouchi W-C Wang

T.	M.L. Wigley

SECTION 3

Lead Authors:

U.	Cubasch

R.D. Cess

Contributors:

F. Bretherton

H.	Cattle

J.	T. Houghton

J.F.B. Mitchell

D.	Randall

E.	Roeckner

J. D. Woods

T. Yamanouchi

SECTION 4

Lead Authors:

W.L. Gates

P.	R. Rowntree

Q.	-C. Zeng

NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA

Stanford University, USA

Plymouth Marine Laboratory, UK

German Weather Service, FRG

Harvard University, USA

University of Reading, UK

Harwell Laboratory, UK

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA

ECMWF, UK

Global Atmosphere Division, Department of the Environment, UK

Atmospheric Enivironment Service, Canada

University of Washington, USA

Royal Meteorological Institute, Belgium

Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, FRG

Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique, CNRS, France

Meteorological Office, UK

Main Geophysical Observatory, USSR

NASA Goddard Laboratory of the Atmosphere

University of Chicago, USA

University of Stockholm, Sweden

University of British Columbia, Canada

Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Academia Sinica, China

National Institute of Polar Research, Japan

State University of New York, USA

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK

Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, FRG

State University of New York, USA

University of Wisconsin, USA

Meteorological Office, UK

Meteorological Office, UK

Meteorological Office, UK

Colorado State University, USA

Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, FRG National Environment Research Council, UK National Institute of Polar Research, Japan

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA

Meteorological Office, UK

Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Academy of Sciences, China

Contributors:

P.A. Arkin

A. Baede

L. Bengtsson

A.	Berger

C.	Blondin

G.	J. Boer

K.	Bryan

R.	E. Dickinson

S.	Grotch

D.	Harvey

E.	O. Holopainen

R.	Jenne

J.	E. Kutzbach

H.	Le Treut

P. Lemke

B.	McAvaney

G.A. Meehl

P. Morel

T.	N. Palmer

L.	P. Prahm

S.	H. Schneider

K.	P. Shine

I.	H. Simmonds

J.	E. Walsh R.T. Wetherald

J. Willebrand

NOAA Climate Analysis Center, USA

KNMI, The Netherlands

ECMWF, UK

Institute d'Astronomie et de Geophysique, Belgium

Direction de la Meteorologie Nationale, France

Canadian Climate Center, Canada

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA University of Toronto, Canada

University of Helsinki, Finland

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA University of Wisconsin, USA

Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique du CNRS, France Max Planck Institut fiir Meteorologie, FRG

Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA

WMO, Switzerland

ECMWF, UK

Danish Meteorological Institute, Denmark

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA University of Reading, UK

University of Melbourne, Australia

University of Illinois, USA

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA Institut fiir Meerskunde der Universitat Kiel, FRG

SECTION 5

Lead Authors:	
J. F. B. Mitchell	Meteorological Office, UK
S. Manabe	NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA
V. Meleshko	Main Geophysical Observatory, USSR
T. Tokioka	Meteorological Research Institute, Japan
Contributors:	
A. Baede	KNMI, The Netherlands
A. Berger	Institute d'Astronomie et de Geophysique, Belgium
G. Boer	Atmospheric Environment Service, Canada
M. Budyko	State Hydrological Institute, USSR
V. Canute	NASA Goddard Insitute for Space Studies, USA
H-X Cao	State Meteorological Administration, China
R.E. Dickinson	National Center forAtmospheric Research, USA
H. Ellsaesser	Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA
S. Grotch	Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA
R.J. Haarsma	KNMI, The Netherlands
A. Hecht	Environmental Protection Agency Headquarters, USA
B. Hunt	CSIRO, Australia
B. Huntley	University of Durham, UK
B. Keshavamurthy	Physical Research Laboratory, India
R. Koerner	Geological Survey of Canada
C. Lorius	Laboratoire de Glaciologie, CNRS, France
M. MacCracken	Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA
G. Meehl	National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA

E. Oladipo

E.	Perrott

A.B. Pittock

L.	P. Prahm

D. Randall

P.R. Rowntree

M.	E. Schlesinger S.H. Schneider

C.	Senior

N.	Shackleton

W.	J. Shuttleworth

R. Stouffer

F.	Street-Perrott

A. Velichko

K. Vinnikov

R.	T. Wetherald

SECTION 6

Lead Authors:

F.	P. Bretherton

K. Bryan

J.D. Woods

Contributors:

J.	Hansen

M. Hoffert

X.	Jiang

S.	Manabe

G.	Meehl

S.	C.B. Raper

D.	Rind

M.E. Schlesinger

R. Stouffer

T.	Volk

T.M.L. Wigley

SECTION 7

Lead Authors:

C.	K. Folland

T.R. Karl

K.	Ya. Vinnikov

Contributors:

J.K. Angell

P.A. Arkin

R.G. Barry

R.S. Bradley

D.	L. Cadet

M. Chelliah

M. Coughlan

B.	Dahlstrom

H.	F. Diaz

H. Flohn

C.	Fu

Ahmadu Bello University, Nigeria

Oxford University, UK

CSIRO, Australia

Danish Meteorological Institute, Denmark

Colorado State University, USA

Meteorological Office, UK

University of Illinois, USA

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA

Meteorological Office, UK

University of Cambridge, UK

Institute of Hydrology, UK

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA

University of Oxford, UK

State Hydrological Institute, USSR

State Hydrological Institute, USSR

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA

University of Wisconsin, USA

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA Natural Environment Research Council, UK

NASA Goddard Institute of Space Studies, USA

New York University, USA

University of Illinois, USA

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK NASA Goddard Insitute for Space Studies, USA University of Illinois, USA

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA University of New York, USA

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK

Meteorological Office, UK

NOAA National Climate Data Centre, USA

State Hydrological Institute, USSR

NOAA Air Resources Laboratory, USA

NOAA Climate Analysis Center, USA

University of Colorado, USA

University of Massachussetts, USA

Institut National des Sciences de l'Universe, France

NOAA Climate Analysis Center, USA

Bureau of Meteorology, Australia

Meteorological and Hydrological Institute, Sweden

NOAA Environmental Research Laboratories, USA

Meteorologisches Institut, FRG

Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Academy of Sciences, China

P Ya Groisman

A Gruber

S Hastenrath

A Henderson-Sellers

K. Higuchi

P.D. Jones

J.	Knox

G. Kukla

S Levitus

X Lin N. Nicholls

B S. Nyenzi

J S. Oguntoyinbo

G.B. Pant

D.E. Parker

A.	B Pittock

R.	W. Reynolds

C.	F. Ropelewski C D Schonwiese

B.	Sevruk

A.R. Solow

K.	E. Trenberth

P. Wadhams

W C. Wang

S.	Woodruff

T.	Yasunan

Z. Zeng

SECTION 8

Lead Authors:

T.M.L. Wigley

T.P. Barnett

Contributors:

TL Bell

P. Bloomfield

D.	Bnllinger

W. Degefu Duzheng Ye

S. Gadgil

G.S. Golitsyn

J.E. Hansen K Hasselmann

Y. Hayashi

P.D. Jones

D.J. Karoly

R.W. Katz

M C. MacCracken R.L. Madden

S Manabe

JFB Mitchell

A D Moura

C Nobre

LJ Ogallo

State Hydrological Institute, USSR

NOAA/NESDIS, USA

University of Wisconsin, USA

Macquarie University, Australia

Atmospheric Environment Service, Canada

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK

Atmospheric Environment Service, Canada

Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory, USA

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA

State Meteorological Administration, China

Bureau of Meteorology, Australia

Directorate of Meteorology, Tanzania

University of Ibadan, Nigeria

Institute of Tropical Meteorology, India

Meteorological Office, UK

CSIRO, Australia

NOAA Climate Analysis Center, USA

NOAA Climate Analysis Center, USA

Institut fur Meteorologie und Geophysics, FRG

University of Zunch, Switzerland

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, USA

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA

Scott Polar Research Institute, UK

State University of New York, Albany, USA

NOAA Environmental Research Laboratories, USA

Institute of Geoscience, Japan

Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc , USA and China

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK University of California, USA

NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA

North Carolina State University, USA

University of California, USA

National Meteorological Services Agency, Ethiopia

Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Academy of Sciences, China

Institute of Science, India

Institute of Atmospheric Physics, USSR

NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA

Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, FRG

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK Monash University, Australia

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA

NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA

Meteorological Office, UK

Institute de Pesquisas Espaciais, Brazil

Institute de Pesquisas Espaciais, Brazil

University of Nairobi, Kenya

E.	O. Oladipo

D.E. Parker

S.	C.B. Raper

A.	B. Pittock

B.	D. Santer

M.E. Schlesinger

C.	-D. Schonwiese

C.	J.E. Schuurmans A. Solow

K.E. Trenberth

K.Ya. Vinnikov

W.M. Washington

D.	Ye

T.	Yasunari

F.	W. Zwiers

SECTION 9

Lead Authors:

R.A. Warrick

J. Oerlemans

Contributors:

P. Beaumont

R.	J. Braithwaite

D.	J. Drewry

V.	Gomitz

J.M. Grove

W.	Haeberli

A.	Higashi

J.C. Leiva

C.S. Lingle

C. Lorius

S.	C.B. Raper

B.	Wold

P.L. Woodworth

SECTION 10

Lead Authors:

J. Melillo

T.	V. Callaghan

F. 1. Woodward

E.	Salati

S. K. Sinha

Contributors:

H. Abdel Nour

J. Aber

V. Alexander

J. Anderson

A. Auclair

F.	Bazzaz

A. Breymeyer

A. Clarke

C.	Field

Ahmadu Bello University, Nigeria

Meteorological Office, UK

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK CSIRO, Australia

Max Planck Institut fiir Meteorologie, FRG

University of Illinois, USA

Institute fiir Meteorologie und Geophysics, FRG

KNMI, The Netherlands

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, USA

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA

State Hydrological Institute, USSR

National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA

Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Academy of Sciences, China

University of Tsukuba, Japan

Canadian Climate Center, Canada

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK

Institute of Meteorology and Oceanography, The Netherlands

St David's University College, UK

Geological Survey of Greenland, Denmark

British Antarctic Survey, UK

NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA

University of Cambridge, UK

Versuchsanstalt fur Wasserbau, Switzerland

International Christian University, Japan

Instituto Argentino de Nivologia y Glaciologia, Argentina NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA Laboratoire de Glaciologie, CNRS, France

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK Water Resources and Energy Administration, Norway Proudman Oceanic Laboratory, UK

Woods Hole Marine Laboratory, USA

Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, UK

University of Cambridge, UK

Universidade do Estado de Sao Paulo, Brazil

Agriculture Research Institute, India

General National Forests Corporation, Sudan

University of New Hampshire, USA

University of Alaska, USA

Hatherly Laboratories, UK

Quebec, Canada

Harvard University, USA

Institute of Geography and Spatial Organization, Poland

British Antarctic Survey, UK

Stanford University, USA

J.P. Grime R. Gifford J. Goudrian

R.	Harriss

I.	Heany

P. Holligan P. Jarvis

L.	Joyce P. Levelle

S.	Linder A. Linkins S. Long

A.	Lugo

J.	McCarthy J. Morison W. Oechel

M.	Phillip M. Ryan D. Schimel W. Schlesinger G. Shaver

B.	Strain R. Waring

M. Williamson

University of Sheffield, UK

CSIRO, Australia

Agricultural University, The Netherlands

University of New Hampshire, USA

Institute of Freshwater Ecology, Windermere Laboratory, UK Plymouth Marine Laboratory, UK

University of Edinburgh, UK

Woods Hole Research Center, USA

Laboratoire d'Ecologie de l'Ecole Normale, CNRS, France

University of Agricultural Sciences, Sweden

Clarkson University, USA

University of Essex, UK

Institute of Tropical Forestry, USA

Harvard University, USA

University of Reading, Uk

San Diego State University, USA

Institute of Plant Ecology, Denmark

Woods Hole Research Center, USA

Colorado State University, USA

Duke University, USA

Woods Hole Research Center, USA

Duke University, USA

Oregon State University, USA

York University, UK

SECTION 11

Lead Authors:

G. McBean

J.	McCarthy

Contributors:

K.	Browning

P. Morel

I. Rasool

University of British Columbia, Canada Harvard University, USA

Meteorological Office, UK

WMO, Switzerland

OSSA, NASA, USA

ANNEX

Coordinators:

G.J.Jenkins

R.G.Derwent

Meteorological Office, UK

Harwell Laboratory, UK

Model calculations contributed by: C. Bruhl

E. Byutner

R.G.Derwent

I.	Enting

J.	Goudriaan

K.	Hasselmann

M.Heimann

I.S.A Isaksen

C.	E. Johnson

I. Karol

D.	Kinnison

A.A.Kiselev

K.Kurz

Max Plank Institute fur Chemie, FRG

Main Geophysical Observatory, USSR

Harwell Laboratory, UK

CSIRO, Australia

Wageningen Agricultural University, Netherlands Max Planck Institute fur Meteorologie, FRG Max Planck Institute fur Meteorologie, FRG University of Oslo, Norway

Harwell Laboratory, UK

Main Geophysical Observatory, USSR

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA Main Geophysical Observatory, USSR

Max Planck Institute fur Meteorologie, FRG

T.-H. Peng	Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA
M.J. Prather	Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA
S.C.B.Raper	UniversiLy of East AngHa, UK
K.P.Shine	University of Reading, UK
U. Siegenthalcr	University of Bern, Switzerland
F. Stordal	University of Oslo, Norway
A.M. Thompson	Goddard Space Flight Center, USA
D.Tirpak	Environmental Protection Agency, USA
R. A. Warrick	University of East Anglia, UK
T.M.L. Wigley	University of East Anglia, UK
D.J.Wuebbles	Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA

Appendix 4

REVIEWERS OF IPCC WGI REPORT

The persons named below all contributed to the peer review of the IPCC Working Group I Report. Whilst every attempt was made by the Lead Authors to incorporate their comments, in some cases these formed a minority opinion which could not be reconciled with the larger concensus. Therefore, there may be persons below who still have points of disagreement with areas of the Report

AUSTRALIA

R.	Allan

I.	Allison

G.	Ayers

B. Pittock

W. Bouma

B. Bourke

B.	Budd

T Denmead

M. Dix

I Enting

J.	Evans

S.	Faragher

R. Francey

P. Fraser

J. Fredenksen

I.	Galbally

J.	Garratt

D. Gauntlett

R.	Gifford

S.	Godfrey

H.	Gordon

J.	Gras

C.	Griffith

A. Henderson-Sellers

K.	Hennesey

T Hirst

R Hughes

B Hunt

J. Kalma

D Karoly

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

Australian Antarctic Division

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

Melbourne University

CSIRO (Centre for Environmental Mechanics)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

CSIRO (Division of Plant Industry)

CSIRO (Division of Oceanography)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

Department of Arts, Sport, Environment, Tourism & Territories

Macquarie University

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division ot Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division oi Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division ot Water)

Monash University

H.	Kenway

M. Manton

B. McAveney

A.	McEwan

J. McGregor

W. J. McG Tegart

I.	Noble

G.Pearman

M. Platt

P. Price

P. Quilty

M.	Raupach

B.	Ryan

L. Rikus

I. Simmonds

N.	Smith

N.	Streten

L.	Tomlin

G.	B. Tucker

M.	Voice

I.	Watterson

P. Whetton

M. Williams

S. Wilson

K H Wyrhol

J.	Zillman

AUSTRIA

R. Christ

H.	Hojensky

H. Kolb

O.	Preining

BELGIUM

A Berger

BRAZIL

C.	Nobre

CANADA

M. Berry

G.	J. Boer

R. Daley

B. Goodison

D.	Harvey

H.	Hengeveld

G. McBean

L. Mysak

W.R. Peltier

R W. Stewart

F. Zwiers

Department of Prime Minister & Cabinet

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

CSIRO (Division of Oceanography)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

ASTEC

Australian National University

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

Australian Antarctic Division

CSIRO (Centre for Environmental Mechanics)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

Melbourne University

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

Department of Industry, Technology & Commerce

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) Australian Bureau of Meteorology

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research)

Monash University

Cape Grim Baseline Air Pollution Station University of Western Australia

Australian Bureau of Meteorology

Federal Ministry of Environment, Youth and Family

Federal Environmental Agency

Institut fur Meteorologie und Geophysik

Institut fur Experimentalphysik

Instute d'Astronomie et de Geophysique

Instituto de Pesquisas Espaciais

Canadian Climate Centre

Canadian Climate Centre

Canadian Climate Centre

Canadian Climate Centre

University of Toronto (Department of Geography) Canadian Climate Centre

University of British Columbia

Canadian Climate Centre

Canadian Climate Centre

Canadian Climate Centre

CHINA

Chong-guang Yuan Cong-bin Fus Ding Yihui Du-zheng Ye Guang-yu Shi Ming-xing Wang Qing-cun Zeng Shi-yan Tao Xue-hong Zhang Zhou Xiuji Zhao Zongci	Institute of Atmospheric Physics Institute of Atmospheric Physics Academy of Meteorological Sciences Institute of Atmospheric Physics Institute of Atmospheric Physics Institute of Atmospheric Physics Institute of Atmospheric Physics Institute of Atmospheric Physics Institute of Atmospheric Physics Academy of Meteorological Sciences Institute of Climate
DENMARK  P. Frich  K.	Frydendahl  L.	Laursen  L.P. Prahm  A. Wiin-Nielsen	Danish Meteorological Institute  Danish Meteorological Institute  Danish Meteorological Institute  Danish Meteorological Institute  Geophysical Institute (University of Copenhagen)

EGYPT

A.M. Mehanna  A.L. Shaaban	Meteorological Authority  Meteorological Authority

ETHIOPIA

W. Degufu  T. Haile	National Meteorological Services Agency  National Meteorological Services Agency

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

P. Crutzen  K. Hasselmann  B.	Santer  C.	D. Schonwiese  J. Willebrand	SCIGBP  Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie  Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie  Institut fiir Meteorologir und Geophysik der Universitat Goethe  Institut fiir Meerskunde der Universitat Kiel

FINLAND

E. Holopainen	University of Helsinki
FRANCE  A. Alexiou  D. Cariolle  C. Lorius	CCO, UNESCO  EERM/Centre National de Recherches Meteorologiques  Laboratoire de Glaciologie, CNRS

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

S. Dyck  H. Lass  D. Spaenkuch	Dresden Technical University Institute for Marine Research Meteorological Service of GDR

INDIA

S. Gadgil	Indian Institute of Sciences

ITALY

M. Conte  M. Olacino  S. Yanni	Italian Meteorological Service (Climate Unit)  National Research Council (Institute of Atmospheric Physics)  Italian Meteorological Service

JAPAN

H. Akimoto  H. Muramalsu T. Nakazawa A. Noda M. Okada  Y, Sugimur  R. Yamamoto T, Yasunari \L Yoshino	National Institute for Environmental Studies  Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University Meteorological Research Institute  Meteorological Research Institute Meteorological Research Institute  Meteorological Research Institute Laboratory for Climatic Research, Kyoto University University of Tsukuba, Institute of Geoscience University of Tsukuba, Institute of Geoscience

KENYA

LJ. Ogallo	University of Nairobi, Meteorology Department
NETHERLANDS  A. Baede  T. Buishand  J. de Ronde  W. de Ruijter  A. Kattenberg  J. Rozema  C. Schuurmans  R. J. Swart  H. Tennekes  R. Van Dorland  A. van Ulden	Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)  Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)  Rijkswaterstaat, Department of Transport and Public Works Institute for Meteorological & Oceanography, University of Utrecht Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)  University of Amsterdam  Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)  Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM)  Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)  Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)  Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI)
NEW ZEALAND  J. S. Hickman  W. A. Laing  D. C. Lowe  M. R. Manning  A. B. Mullan	New Zealand Meteorological Service  DSIR Fruit and Trees  DSIR Institute of Nuclear Sciences DSIR Institute of Nuclear Sciences  New Zealand Meteorological Service

NIGERIA

E.O. Oladipo	University of Ahmadu Bello, Geography Department
SAUDI ARABIA  J. C. McCain  N. I. Tawfiq	Research Institute (King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals) Meteorological & Environmental Protection Administration

SENEGAL

E.S. Diop M. Seek	COMARAF  Ministere de l'Equipement

SOVIET UNION

M. Budyko  G.S. Golitsyn  I. L. Karol  V. Meleshko	Main Geophysical Observatory  Academy of Sciences, Institute of Atmospheric Physics  Main Geophysical Observatory  Main Geophysical Observatory

SWEDEN

B. Bolin  B. Dahlstrom	University of Stockholm  Swedish Meteorological & Hydrological Institute

T. R. Gerholm  A. Johannsson  E. Kallen  H. Sundqvist  G. Walin	University of Stockholm  University of Stockholm  University of Stockholm  University of Stockholm  Goteborg University (Department of Oceanography)

SWITZERLAND

M. Beniston H. C. Davies  J.	Fuhrer  F. Gassmann  K.	Kelts  H. R. Luthi  P. Morel  A. Ohmura  H. Oeschger	ERCOFTAC - Ecole Polytechnique de Lausanne Laboratory of Atmospheric Physics  Swiss Federal Research Station  Paul Scherrer Institute  Swiss Academy of Sciences  Swiss Federal Office of Energy  WMO  Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Physikalisches Institute, University of Bern
THAILAND  P. Patvivatsiri	Meteorological Department, Bangkok

UNITED KINGDOM

B. Hoskins  B. Huntley  P.D. Jones  P. Killworth  G. Needier  N. J. Shackleton  K.P. Shine  T. M. L. Wigley J. D. Woods	University of Reading  University of Durham  University of East Anglia, Climatic Research Unit Hooke Institute  WOCE, Institute of Oceanographic Sciences  University of Cambridge  University of Reading  University of East Anglia, Climatic Research Unit  Natural Environment Research Council

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

J.D. Aber J. Angell A. Arking  D.	J. Baker T.C. Bell  C.R. Bentley F.P. Bretherton P Brewer W.E. Carter T. Charlock R. Cicerone  N. Cobb R. Dahlman R.E. Dickinson R.K. Dixon J. Dutton  J.A. Eddy R. Ellingson H.W. Ellsaesser  E.	Ferguson J. Firor  J. Fishman	University of New Hampshire  NOAA  NASA/GSFC  Joint Oceanographic Institutes Inc NASA/GSFC  University of Wisconsin at Madison  SSEC, University of Wisconsin  Pacific Marine Laboratory  National Geodetic Survey NAS/LARC  University of California at Irvine  National Centre for Atmospheric Research U.S. EPA  Pennsylvania State University  UCAR  University of Maryland  Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory NOAA  National Centre for Atmospheric Research NAS/LARC

B. Flannery	Exxon Research and Engineering Company
M.Ghil	University of California, Los Angeles
I. Goklany	
D. Goodrich	NASA Office of Climatic and Atmospheric Research
T.E. Graedel	Bell Telephone Laboratories
S. Grotch	Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
K.Hanson	NOAA
D.J. Jacob	Harvard University
C.Y.J. Kao	Los Alamos National Laboratory
Y.J. Kaufman	NASA/GSFC
J.T. Kiehl	National Centre for Atmospheric Research
J. Mahlman	NOAA
T. Malone	St Joseph's College
G. MacDonald	MITRE Corporation
M. McFarland	DuPont
G.A. Meehl	National Centre for Atmospheric Research
G. North	Texas A&M University
J. O'Brien	ccco
M. Oppenheimer	Environmental Defence Fund
R. Perhac	Electric Power Institute
A.M. Perry	Retired
D.Randall	Colorado State University
P. Risser	Universtiy of New Mexico
A. Robock	University of Maryland
D.R. Rodenhuis	U.S. Department of Commerce
W. Rossow	NASA/GISS
D. Schimel	Colorado State University
W.H. Schlesinger	Duke University
S.H. Schneider	National Centre for Atmospheric Research
J. Shukla	University of Maryland
J. Sigmon	Environmental Protection Agency
J. Smagorinsky	
D.W. Stahle	Universtiy of Arkansas
J. Steele	Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute
G. Stevens	Colorado State University
P.H. Stone	Massachusetts Institute of Technology
N.D. Sze	AER Inc.
J. Trabalka	Oak Ridge National Laboratory
K.Trenberth	National Centre for Atmospheric Research
K. van Cleve	Universtiy of Alaska
T.H. Vonder Haar	Colorado State University
J.E. Walsh	University of Illinois
D.E. Ward	USDA Forest Service
R.T. Watson	NASA HQ, Washington
T. Webb	Brown University
G. Weller	Universtiy of Alaska
R.T. Wetherald	Princeton University (GFDL)
R.S. Williams Jr.	U.S. Geological Survey
F.B. Wood	U.S. Congress
B. Worrest	Environmental Protection Agency

Appendix 5

ACRONYMS:

INSTITUTIONS

AERE CCC CNRS CRU CSIRO EPA GFDL GISS ICSU IPCC MGO MPI MRI NASA NATO NCAR NOAA OSU SCOPE UKDOE UKMO UNEP USDOE WMO

Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, UK

Canadian Climate Centre, Downsview, Ontario, Canada

Centre National de Recherches Meteorologiques, France

Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK

Commonwealth Scientific & Industrial Research Organisation, Australia

Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, USA

Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Princeton, USA

Goddard Institute of Space Sciences, New York, USA

International Council of Scientific Unions

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Main Geophysical Laboratory, Leningrad,USSR

Max Planck Institut, FRG

Meteorological Research Institute, Japan

National Aeronautics and Space Administration, USA

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, USA

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, USA

Oregon State University, USA

Scientific Committee On Problems of the Environment

Department of the Environment, UK

Meteorological Office, Bracknell, UK

United Nations Environment Programme

Department of the Energy, USA

World Meteorological Organisation

Appendix 6

ACRONYMS: PROGRAMMES & MISCELLANEOUS

PROGRAMMES:	
CLIMAP	Climatic Applications Project (WMO)
COADS	Comprehensive Ocean Air Data Set
GAW	Global Atmospheric Watch
ERBE	Earth Radiation Budget Experiment
ERS	Earth Resources Satellite
GEWEX	Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment
GMCC	Geophysical Monitoring of Climatic Change
ICRCCM	Intercomparison of Radiation Codes in Climate Models
IGAC	International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Programme
IGBP	International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
ISCCP	International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project
JGOFS	Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
SAGE	Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment
TOGA	Tropical Ocean and Global Atmosphere
WCRP	World Climate Research Programme
WOCE	World Ocean Circulation Experiment
MISCELLANEOUS	
3-D	Three dimensional
AET	Actual Evapotranspiration
AGCM	Atmosphere General Circulation Model
AVHRR	Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer
BaU	Business-as-Usual
BP	Boiling Point
CCN	Cloud Condensation Nuclei
CRF	Cloud Radiative Forcing
CW	Cloud Water
EBM	Energy Balance Model
EKE	Eddy Kinetic Energy
ENSO	El Nino Southern Oscillation
FC	Fixed Cloud
GCM	General Circulation Model
GP	Gross Prediction
GPP	Gross Primary Production
GWP	Global Warming Potential

LWC	Liquid Water Content
MCA	Moist Convective Adjustment
MSL	Mean Sea Level
NH	Northern Hemisphere
NPP	Net Primary Production
ODP	Ozone Depletion Potential
OGCM	Ocean General Circulation Model
OLR	Outgoing Longwave Radiation
PBL	Planetary Boundary Layer
PC	Penetrative Convection
RCM	Radiative Convective Model
RH	Relative Humidity
SH	Southern Hemisphere
SST	Sea Surface Temperature
TOA	Top of the Atmosphere
WUE	Water Use Efficiency
UV	Ultraviolet

Appendix 7

UNITS

SI (System# Internationale) Units:

Physical Quantity	Name of Unit	Symbol
length	meter	m
mass	kilogram	kg
time	second	s
thermodynamic temperature	kelvin	K
amount of substance	mole	mol

Fraction	Prefix	Symbol	Multiple	Prefix	Symbol
IO'1	deci	d	10	deka	da
10'2	centi	c	W2	hecto	h
IO'3	milli	mt	103	kilo	k
10'6	micro	U	106	mega	M
IO'9	nano	n	109	giga	G
JO'12	pico	P	1012	tera	T
IO'15	femto	f	1015	peta	P
IO’18	atto	a			

Special Names and Symbols for Certain Si-Derived Units:

Physical Quantity Name of SI Unit Symbol for SI Unit Definition of Unit

force	newton	N	kg m s'2
pressure energy power frequency	pascal	Pa	kg	m‘^s"2(=Nm’2)  joule	J	kg	m2 s'2  watt	W	kg	m2s’3(=Js’l)  hertz	Hz	s-1 (cycle per second)

Decimal Fractions and Multiples of SI Units Having Special Names:

Physical Quantity Name of Unit	Symbol for Unit	Definition of Unit

length length area force	angstrom	A	1 O’10 m	=	10’8cm  micrometer	pm	10"^m =	pm  hectare	ha	lO^m2  dyne	dyn	10“2 N
pressure pressure weight	bar	bar	102 N m’2  millibar	mb	lhPa  ton	t	102 Kg

Non- SI Units:

°C	degrees Celsius (0°C = 273K approximately)  Temperature differences are also given in °C (=K) rather than the more correct form of "Celsius degrees".
ppmv ppbv PPtv	parts per million (1 O^)by volume parts per billion (10^) by volume parts per trillion (10^2 ) by volume
bp kpb mbp	(years) before present thousands of years before present millions of years before present

The units of mass adopted in this report are generally those which have come into common usage, and have deliberately not been harmonised, e.g.,

GtC  MtN  TgS	gigatonnes of carbon (1 GtC = 3.7 Gt carbon dioxide) megatonnes of nitrogen teragrams of sulphur

Appendix 8

CHEMICAL SYMBOLS

o	atomic oxygen	ho2	hydroperoxyl
02	molecular oxygen	NOy	total active nitrogen
N	atomic nitrogen	pCO2	partial pressure CO2
n2	molecular nitrogen	CFC	chlorofluorocarbon
H	hydrogen	DMS	Di Methyl Sulphide
Cl	chlorine		
Cl2	molecular chlorine		
Br	bromine	CFC-11	CFCI3
F	fluorine		(trichlorofluoromethane)
ch4	methane	CFC-12	CF2C12
n2o	nitrous oxide		(dichloro-difluoromethane)
NO	nitric oxide	CFC-13	CF3CI
no2	nitrogen dioxide	CFC-113	C2F3CI3
CO	carbon monoxide		(trichloro-trifluoroethane)
CO2	carbon dioxide	CFC-114	C2F4C12
h2o	water		(dichloro-tetrafluoroethane)
CH3CI	methyl chloride	CFC-115	C2F5CI
CH3Br	methyl bromide		(chloropentafluoroethane)
O3	ozone	HCFC-22	CHF2C1
OH	hydroxyl		(chlorodifluoromethane)
CCI4	carbon tetrachloride	HCFC-123	C2HF3CI2 (CHCI2CF3)
NMHC	non-methane hydrocarbons	HCFC-124	CHFCICF3
NOX	nitrogen oxide	HFC-125	CHF2CF3
CH3CCI3	methyl chloroform	HCFC-132b	C2H2F2CI2
HNO3	nitric acid	HFC-134a	C2H2F4 (CH2FCF3)
PAN: CH3CO3NO2	peroxyacetylnitrate	HCFC-141b	CH3CFCI2
NO3	nitrate radical	HCFC-142b	CH3CF2CI
SO2	sulphur dioxide	HFC-143a	CH3CF3
COS	carbonyl sulphide	HFC-152a	CH3CHF2
h2s	dimethylsulphide		
BrO	bromine monoxide	HALON 1211	CF2BrCl (CBrClF2)
HC1	hydrochloric acid		(bromodichloromethane)
c2h6	ethane	HALON 1301	CF3Br (CBrF3)
C1O2	chlorine dioxide		(bromotri fluoromethane)
C1ONO2	chlorine nitrate	HALON 2402	C2F4Br2
HOCl	hypochlorous acid		(dibromo-tetrafluoroethane)
H2O2	hydrogen peroxide		

This is (he Report of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which was set up jointly by the World Meteorological Organization and United Nations Environment Programme in 19X8. It is an assessment of how human activities may be changing the Earth's climate through the Greenhouse Effect - potentially the greatest global environmental challenge facing mankind. The topics covered by this assessment include:

•	Changes in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere

•	The global climate system and how it is modelled

•	Computer predictions of climate change

•	Observed climate change over the last century

•	Detection of climate change due to human activities

•	Changes in sea level due to global warming

•	The response of ecosystems to climate change

•	Research required to narrow uncertainties

Several hundred international scientists participated in the preparation and review of this assessment, making it the most authoritative and strongly supported statement on climate change that has been made by (he scientific community so far. The information presented here is of the highest quality. It has been designed to provide a common guide to policymakers worldwide, and will now form a solid scientific foundation upon which forthcoming negotiations on the response to climate change will be based. This assessment is, therefore, an essential reference for all who are concerned with climate change and its consequences.



WMO	UNEP

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS